Assassins Creed
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
This article is about the franchise. For the first game in the series, see Assassins Creed video game. For the book series, see Assassins Creed book series. For the 2016 film adaptation, see Assassins Creed film.
Assassins Creed
Assassins Creed Logo.svg
Genres
Actionadventure
Stealth
Developers
Ubisoft Montreal
Ubisoft Annecy
Ubisoft Sofia
Ubisoft Milan
Ubisoft Quebec
Ubisoft Toronto
Gameloft
Griptonite Games
Blue Byte
PublishersUbisoft
Creators
Patrice Dsilets
Jade Raymond
Corey May
First releaseAssassins Creed
November 13, 2007
Latest releaseAssassins Creed Odyssey
October 5, 2018
Assassins Creed is an actionadventure stealth video game franchise created by Patrice Dsilets, Jade Raymond and Corey May, developed and published by Ubisoft using the game engine Anvil Next. It depicts in the centuriesold struggle, now and then, between the Assassins, who fight for peace with free will, and the Templars, who desire peace through control. The series features historical fiction, science fiction and characters, intertwined with realworld historical events and figures. For the majority of time players would control an Assassin in the past history, while they also play as Desmond Miles or an Assassin Initiate in the present day, who hunt down their Templar targets.

The video game series took inspiration from the novel Alamut by the Slovenian writer Vladimir Bartol,1 while building upon concepts from the Prince of Persia series.2 It begins with the selftitled game in 2007, and has featured eleven main games. The most recent released game is 2018s Assassins Creed Odyssey.

A new story and time period are introduced in each entry, and gameplay elements evolve from the previous one. There are three story arcs in the series. For the first five main games, the framing story is set in 2012 and features series protagonist Desmond Miles who uses a machine called the Animus and relives the memories of his ancestors to find a way to avert the 2012 apocalypse. In games till Assassins Creed Syndicate, Abstergo employees and Assassin initiates recorded genetic memories using the Helix software, helping the Templars and Assassins find new Pieces of Eden in the modern world. The latest two games, Assassins Creed Origins and Assassins Creed Odyssey follow exAbstergo employee Layla Hassan as she is recruited into the Assassins Creed.

Main games of Assassins Creed are set in an open world and presented from the thirdperson perspective where the protagonists take down targets using their combat and stealth skills with the exploitation of the environment. Freedom of exploration is given to the player the historical settings to finish main and side quests. Apart from singleplayer missions, some games also provide competitive and cooperative multiplayer gameplay. While main games are produced for major consoles and desktop platforms, multiple spinoff games were also released in accompany for consoles, mobiles, and handhelds platforms.

The main games in the Assassins Creed video game series have received generally positive reviews for their ambition in visuals, game design, and narratives, with criticism towards the yearly release cycle and frequent bugs. The spinoff games received mixed to positive reviews. The video game series has received multiple awards and nominations, including Game of the Year awards. It is also commercially successful, selling over 100 million copies as of September 2016, becoming Ubisofts bestselling franchise and one of the highest selling video game franchises of all time. Assassins Creed was adapted by its selftitled film, which received negative reviews. A book series of art books, encyclopedias, comics, novelizations, and novels is also published. All of the media take place within the same continuity as the main video game series.


Contents
1History
2Premise
2.1Protagonists
3Gameplay
4Release history
4.1Main series
4.2Collections
4.3Other console games
4.4Handheld and mobile games
4.5Cancelled and defunct games
4.6Future
5In other media
5.1Television
5.2Films
5.3Comics
5.4Novels
5.5Board games
5.6Assassins Creed: Encyclopedia
6Reception
7In popular culture
7.1References in other video game franchises
7.2References in other film franchises
8References
9External links
History

Members of Ubisoft Quebec, developer team of the latest title in the series, Assassins Creed Odyssey
The Assassins Creed series originated out of ideas for a sequel for Prince of Persia: The Sands of Time, a title developed by Ubisoft Montreal and published by Ubisoft in 2003. The Sands of Time was a full 3D adaption for the PlayStation 2 of the original Prince of Persia games, and included a number of parkour moves and combat. The Sands of Time was a critical and financial success, leading Ubisoft to request Ubisoft Montreal to develop a sequel, aiming for the next console generation. The Ubisoft Montreal team decided on taking the gameplay from The Sands of Time into a open world approach, taking advantage of the improved processing power to render larger spaces and crowds. Narratively, the team wanted to move away from the Prince simply being someone next in line for the throne but to have to work for it; combined with research into secret societies led them to focus on the Assassins, heavily borrowing from the novel Alamut.3

They developed a narrative where the player would control an Assassin that served as a bodyguard for a nonplayable Prince, leading them to call this game Prince of Persia: Assassin. Ubisoft was not happy with a Prince of Persia game without the Prince as the playable character, but this led to the marketing division to suggest the name Assassins Creed, playing off the creed of the Assassins, nothing is true; everything is permitted. Ubisoft Montreal ran with this in creating a wholly new intellectual property, eliminating the Prince and creating the conflict between the Assassins and Templar Knights. Further, in postulating what other assassinations they could account for throughout human history, they came onto the idea of genetic memorydisambiguation needed and created the Animus device and modern storyline elements, which further allowed them to explain certain facets of gameplay, such as accounting when the player fails a mission, in the same way they had done in The Sands of Time.3

Following release of the first Assassins Creed in 2007, Ubisoft Montreal and other Ubisoft studios use the series to present games from various historical periods, striving for historical accuracy while conceding some elements for gameplay.3

Premise
The Assassins Creed games primarily revolve around the rivalry between two ancient secret societies  the Assassins and the Knights Templar  and their indirect relation to an ancient species predating humanity, referred to within the games as those who came before, whose society, along with much of Earths biosphere, was destroyed by a massive solar storm thousands of years before the games. The games realworld chronological setting begins in the year 2012, but most of the gameplay is in historical settings.

Within the franchise, Abstergo Industries is a megacorporation conglomerate with multiple branches, secretly run by modern Knights Templar. The company is the presentday main antagonist of the franchise. Abstergo secretly created the Animus, a device that allows its users to relive and experience the memories of their genetic ancestors within their bloodline through a virtual simulation. Overexposure to the animus causes the bleeding effect, which results in giving the user skills and abilities of his ancestors, but is also dangerous for the user as it can damage their mind, causing symptoms such as dementia, insanity, dissociative identity disorder or brain damage. Abstergo is seeking to discover the location of several historical artifacts, known as the Pieces of Eden. Such artifacts hold great power, and are capable of controlling free will. Abstergo seeks to use them to remove free will and bring humanity into one single unified group, while the Assassins oppose them. In order to find the Pieces of Eden, Abstergo is abducting people whose ancestors are suspected to have had historically confirmed or suspected interactions with such devices, forcing the kidnapped person into the Animus and searching for clues on their ancestors memories within the Animus.

Protagonists
Main article: List of Assassins Creed characters
Desmond Miles is a bartender who is a descendant of several lines of prominent Assassins; though raised as an Assassin, he left his nomadic family to seek out a more common lifestyle. He is initially kidnapped by Abstergo, which is aware of his ancestral lineage. Desmond is forced into the Animus and is revealed to be subject 17; many of the sixteen previous subjects died as a result of Animus overexposure.

Desmond is later rescued by a small team of modernday Assassins and agrees to work with them, continuing to experience the memories of his ancestors to discover the locations of additional Pieces of Eden so they can be recovered before Abstergo can do so. From the bleeding effect, Desmond gains some of the Assassin skills of his predecessors at the cost of living with multiple sets of memories and personalities in his mind.

Within the Animus, Desmond explores the memories of a number of Assassins, including Altar IbnLaAhad, an initially disgraced Assassin working to redeem himself during the Third Crusade; Ezio Auditore da Firenze, an Assassin in Italy during the late 15th and early 16th centuries of the Italian Renaissance; and Ratonhnhak:ton, otherwise known as Connor, a halfMohawk, halfBritish Assassin during the American Revolution.

Throughout these events, Desmond learns of allusions to the prophetic end of the world in 2012 from a former Animus test subject, Subject 16; the event turns out to be a repeat of the disaster which wiped out the ancient civilization, and he finds out that his memories hold the key to Earths surviving a second solar storm. During his experiences, Desmond is aided by holographic projections of three of the ancient races rulers: Jupiter, Minerva, and Juno.

After Desmond dies to ensure Earths survival, his memories, which have survived through genetic samples of his DNA,4 are accessed by Abstergo, which hires a new subject to enter the Animus. The new subject relives the memories of Edward Kenway grandfather of Ratohnhak:ton, otherwise known as Connor Kenway, a privateerturnedpirate during the Golden Age of Piracy.5

Gameplay
While the games are often presented through protagonist Desmond Miles, the bulk of the game is played as Desmond experiences the memories of his ancestors through an advanced device called the Animus. This provides a means of a diegetic interface, showing Desmonds ancestors health, equipment, goals, and other features as part of the Animus interface. The Animus is based on the player controlling the assassin to maintain the synchronization between Desmond and his ancestors memories. Performing actions that go against the Assassins way or dying breaks the synchronization, effectively requiring the player to restart at a previous checkpoint. Furthermore, the player cannot explore outside areas that the assassin has not experienced yet. There are also abnormalities within the Animus from previous users of the device.

While playing as the Assassin characters, the games are generally presented from a thirdperson perspective in an open world environment, focusing on stealth and parkour. The games use a mission structure to follow the main story, generally assigning the player to complete an assassination of public figureheads or a covert mission. Alternatively, several side missions are available, such as mapping out the expansive cities from a high perch followed by performing a leap of faith into a haystack below, collecting treasures hidden across the cities, exploring ruins for relics, building a brotherhood of assassins to perform other tasks, or funding the rebuilding of a city through purchasing and upgrading of shops and other features. At times, the player is in direct control of Desmond, who by nature of the Animus use has learned Assassin techniques through the bleeding effect, as well as their genetic ability of Eagle Vision, which separates friend, foe and assassination targets by illuminating people in different colors. Through the Animus interface, the player can go back to retry any past mission already completed; for example, in Assassins Creed: Brotherhood, the player achieves better synchronization results by performing the mission in a specific manner such as by only killing the missions target.

The games use the concept of active versus passive moves, with active moves, such as running, climbing the sides of buildings, or jumping between rooftops, more likely to alert the attention of nearby guards. When the guards become alerted, the player must either fight them or break their line of sight and locate a hiding place, such as a haystack or a well, and wait until the guards alert is reduced. The combat system allows for a number of unique weapons, armor, and moves, including the use of a hidden blade set in a bracer on the Assassins arm, and which also can be used to quietly assassinate targets.

Release history
Games, by year and platform.
Bold title denotes part of the main series.
SettingYearsTitleReleasedConsolesComputersHandheldsMobileOther
Third Crusade1191 ADAssassins Creed2007PlayStation 3, Xbox 360Windows
1190 ADAssassins Creed: Altars Chronicles2008Nintendo DSAndroid, iOS, Symbian, webOS, Windows Phone
1191 ADAssassins Creed: Bloodlines2009PlayStation Portable
Italian Renaissance14761499 ADAssassins Creed IIPlayStation 3, Xbox 360, PlayStation 4, Xbox OneOS X, WindowsSymbianOnLive
1491 ADAssassins Creed II: DiscoveryNintendo DSiOS
14991507 ADAssassins Creed: Brotherhood2010PlayStation 3, Xbox 360, PlayStation 4, Xbox OneOS X, WindowsOnLive
15111512 ADAssassins Creed: Revelations2011WindowsAndroid, Symbian
Colonial era17541783 ADAssassins Creed III2012PlayStation 3, Xbox 360, Wii USymbian
17651777 ADAssassins Creed III: LiberationaPlayStation 3, Xbox 360PlayStation Vita
17151722 ADAssassins Creed IV: Black Flag2013PlayStation 3, Xbox 360, Wii U, PlayStation 4, Xbox One
17161718 ADAssassins Creed: PiratesWindowsbAndroid, iOS
17351737 ADAssassins Creed: Freedom Cryc2014PlayStation 3, PlayStation 4, Xbox 360, Xbox OneWindows
17521776 ADAssassins Creed RoguePlayStation 3, Xbox 360, PlayStation 4, Xbox One
Italian Renaissance15011506 ADAssassins Creed IdentityAndroid, iOS
French Revolution17761800 ADAssassins Creed UnityPlayStation 4, Xbox OneWindows
Imperial China15261532 ADAssassins Creed Chronicles: Chinad2015PlayStation Vitae
Victorian era1868 ADAssassins Creed Syndicate
Sikh Empire1841 ADAssassins Creed Chronicles: India2016PlayStation Vitae
October Revolution1918 ADAssassins Creed Chronicles: Russia
Ptolemaic Egypt4943 BCAssassins Creed Origins2017
Peloponnesian War431404 BCAssassins Creed Odyssey2018
Notes
 Released under the title Assassins Creed: Liberation HD for Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360.
 Available for Windows 8.1 and Windows 10 from the Microsoft store.
 Originally released as DLC for all versions of Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag.
 Originally announced as part of the season pass for Assassins Creed Unity.
 Released as a compilation titled Assassins Creed Chronicles Trilogy Pack.
Main series
Assassins Creed
Main article: Assassins Creed video game
Desmond Miles is captured by Abstergo and forced to use a machine called the Animus to explore Altar ibnLaAhads memories during the time of the Third Crusade. Desmond begins to witness events after Altar breaks all three tenets of the Assassin Brotherhood while attempting to stop Robert de Sabl from taking a Piece of Eden. Al Mualim, the Brotherhoods leader, demotes Altar to Novice and tasks him with assassinating the nine Knights Templars, including de Sabl, to regain his former status. Altars quest eventually leads him to face de Sabl in the presence of King Richard I of England warning the King of de Sabls plot to kill him. Altar defeats de Sabl, but with his last words, de Sabl reveals that there were ten Templars, the last being Al Mualim, who now holds the Piece of Eden. Altar returns to face Al Mualim and struggles to fight through illusions created by the Piece, but eventually kills Al Mualim. When Altar recovers the piece, he and those watching the Animus view a holographic map showing where other artifacts are located across the globe. Desmond is pulled from the Animus, and was going to be killed, but his life is spared by Lucy Stillman, an Assassin working as a mole within Abstergo, as she claims they might need to further examine his memories later. He comes to learn that a former test subject had left messages only Desmond can see, foretelling the end of the world in 2012.

The first Assassins Creed introduced core elements that remained in the rest of the game series. The game creates fictionalized, historical versions of Masyaf the Brotherhoods location, Jerusalem, Acre and Damascus, and incorporates a number of documented historical figures into the story. Other core elements include the virtualized Animus system, free running, climbing, stealth, parkour, and the initial formulation of the combat system. The game requires the player to complete a number of side quests before they are able to obtain an assassin quest from a local Brotherhood guidemaster in each city, but this side quest prerequisite was abandoned in future games.

Assassins Creed II
Main article: Assassins Creed II
Lucy returns and breaks Desmond out of Abstergo, taking him to an Assassin safehouse to work alongside Shaun, a historian, and Rebecca, their technical support. Using an improved version of the Animus, Desmond takes witness to Ezio Auditore da Firenze, a young nobleman from the late 15th century in Florence, shortly before the execution of Ezios father and brothers by order of a corrupt official working for the Templars. He, his mother, and sister take to hiding at the Monteriggioni villa owned by his uncle Mario, who helps to train Ezio in the ways of an Assassin. Ezio and Mario discover that Rodrigo Borgia is the figurehead of a number of Templars all who were accomplices in the execution of his family, and with help of allies like Leonardo da Vinci, methodically assassinate the lowerranked Templars, while learning that Borgia has acquired a Piece of Eden called the Apple. Eventually, Ezio corners Borgia, who hands over the Piece and flees; Ezio is inducted into the ranks of the Brotherhood and believed to be a prophet based on their codex. A decade later, the Brotherhood learns that Borgia has since become Pope Alexander VI, using the Churchs influence to strengthen the Templars. Ezio invades Vatican City and confronts Borgia, discovering that the Papal staff is also a Piece of Eden. Defeating Borgia but sparing his life, Ezio uses both the Apple and the Papal staff to reveal a chamber of ancient technology. Inside, he is addressed by a hologram of a humanoid female that calls herself Minerva who speaks directly to Desmond through Ezio. Minerva explains how her society had predated humanitys, but a great disaster nearly wiped them out, and warns that another event is due to occur soon, putting the fate of humanity in Desmonds hands. Upon this discovery, Desmond and his allies find the safehouse has been compromised by Abstergo and flee.

Similar to the first game, Assassins Creed II takes place in historical recreations of Venice, Florence, Forl, San Gimignano, and the Tuscan countryside, and incorporates events during that period as part of the story. Missions are divided into main story missions, themselves divided into memory sequences reflecting points in Ezios life, and side missions which can be accomplished at any time; this approach to mission structure remains consistent in the other games in the series. The Monteriggioni villa provides several functions which can be expanded on by paying money for upgrades of surrounding buildings, or by purchasing artwork, weapons, and armor for the villa; in turn, the villa will generate wealth for the player at a rate influenced by the upgrades and acquisition of these items. Additional quests involve locating secret Assassin seals, and finding hidden marks left by Subject 16, a former Animus user, that hint at the nature of Minervas society.

Assassins Creed: Brotherhood
Main article: Assassins Creed: Brotherhood
Desmond and his allies retreat to the ruins of the Monteriggioni villa, and Desmond reenters the Animus to continue Ezios memories, specifically to identify the location of the Apple. After facing Rodrigo Borgia, Ezio returned to Monteriggioni, but the villa is soon attacked by forces under the command of Cesare Borgia, Rodrigos son. Mario is killed and the Apple is stolen. Ezio vows revenge by helping to free the people of Rome from the Borgia family. As Ezio works covertly to turn the city against the Borgias, he gains followers that want to join his cause, and Ezio trains them in the way of the Assassins. In an attempt to assassinate Cesare and Rodrigo at the Castel SantAngelo, Ezio instead witnesses Cesare forcing his father to eat a poisoned apple that Rodrigo had prepared to kill his son. Ezio chases down Cesare and eventually captures him and recovers the Apple. Cesare is taken to prison in Viana, Spain but manages to escape with help of his allies. The Assassins lead the fight against Cesare and the remaining loyal Borgia troops, and eventually Ezio throws Cesare from the castle walls, killing him. With no perceived further threats, Ezio takes to hide the Apple under the Colosseum. In the present, Desmond is able to navigate through the underground chambers beneath the Colosseum to locate the Apple. As he picks it up, Desmond is witness to another hologram figure, calling herself Juno, and who controls Desmond to stab Lucy because Lucy has defected to the Templars before he falls into a coma.

Brotherhood shares many of the same features as the previous game though it takes place primarily in Rome. Similar to the villa, the player is able to spend money to buy and upgrade shops and other facilities throughout the city as to increase revenue they can collect from it; however, the player will be required to destroy Borgia towers that control various sections of the city before they can do so. The Brotherhood of Assassins is introduced, by which, after saving citizens from certain events, the player can invite these citizens as Assassins; they can then be dispatched to remote locations across Europe to gain experience and money, or can be called in to help the player directly in a mission. For the first time in the series, the game features online multiplayer. Players play as Abstergo employees, who, through the use of the Animus, take on the genetic memories of Renaissance Templars in various game modes.6 It was the last game to feature Assassins Creed creator Patrice Dsilets, as the creative director of the series.78

Assassins Creed: Revelations
Main article: Assassins Creed: Revelations
Within the computerized core of the Animus, Subject 16 Clay Kaczmarek explains to a comatose Desmond that his mind must achieve full synchronization with Altar and Ezio, or he will fall into dementia. Desmond sees Ezios memories, years after Brotherhood, Ezio researches the Assassins history and travels to Masyaf to locate Altars library, rumored to hold great power within. The Templars also seek to open this library, but it is locked by five keys, hidden in the Ottomanheld Constantinople. Ezio finds the city in a feud between brothers Selim and Ahmet vying for the Sultanate. Ezio is aided by Sofia Sartor; the two fall in love. Eventually, Ahmet reveals himself to be a Templar, and is killed by Selim after he battles with Ezio. Ezio uses the keys to witness Altars memories before and after Al Mualims death, which show the death of Altars wife and youngest son in the midst of a coup detat within the Assassins. Altair exiles himself for twenty years, eventually returning to Masyaf to kill the usurper and retake control. Altar inscribes his memories in the keys and asks his friend Niccol Polo to hide them. Afterwards, Ezio and Sofia go to Masyaf and open the library to find Altars corpse and a Piece of Eden. Ezio leaves it and his assassin tools, and tells Desmond, understanding now of his role as a messenger to him. A holographic being calling himself Jupiter explains to Desmond through Ezio how his society perished as a result of a massive solar flare apocalypse, and that the key to stop the 2012 solar flare lies in the first civilizations technology commanded by vaults linked to a central vault in New York. Within the Animus, Clay sacrifices himself to allow Desmond to wake up from his coma, his memories complete. Along with Shaun, Rebecca, and his father William, Desmond heads to New York to save humanity.

Originally Revelations was announced as Assassins Creed: Lost Legacy, and conceptualized as a Nintendo 3DS title focusing on Ezio traveling to Masyaf. However, on July 15, 2011, it was announced as cancelled. The reason behind such cancellation was that Ubisoft had decided to expand the idea further, cancel the 3DS development and fully shift all development duties towards PlayStation 3, Xbox 360 and PC to release the game as a fullfledged main installment of the franchise. The original plot remained, and evolved into the plot seen in the final game, which became Assassins Creed: Revelations.9 Included were many new systems and additional weapons such as bombcrafting, allowing the player to create explosive, distraction and tactical bombs, using materials found throughout the world and on Assassins Guild missions. The hookblade was also introduced, which can be used in freerunning to travel along zip wires and climb more easily and in combat to manipulate enemies. Eagle Vision was upgraded into the Eagle Sense, allowing Ezio to not only see where his enemies and targets are but also, where they have been and where they are moving to. As the player progresses through, Ezio can train new recruits to defend dens Assassin HQs and an upgraded Assassins missions section called Mediterranean Defense in which the player works to strip control of various cities from Templar hands. The multiplayer mode returned in Revelations, with more characters, modes, and maps, and by advancing up through levels of experience, the player learns more about Abstergos history.

Assassins Creed III
Main article: Assassins Creed III

This sections plot summary may be too long or excessively detailed. Please help improve it by removing unnecessary details and making it more concise. January 2017 Learn how and when to remove this template message
Desmond and his allies arrive at the Temple entrance in a cave in the New York area on October 31, 2012, and open its door using the Apple of Eden, discovering a larger chamber of Precursor technology behind it, including another door requiring a key. Desmond suddenly falls into a fugue state, and is put into the Animus.

In the Animus, he experiences the memories of Haytham Kenway, who is later revealed as a Templar British agent, who had gone to the American Colonies with a stolen medallion, and, with Templar allies including Charles Lee, gained the Mohawk peoples trust as the means to find a Temples location, but to his annoyance, the medallion did not open the Temple for him. The remainder of the game shifts protagonist, to the memories of Haythams son Ratonhnhak:ton, whose heritage is half Mohawk. As a young boy, he witnesses Lee and his troops set fire to his village, killing his mother; years later, he is shown a Piece of Eden, through which Juno speaks to him and instructs him to get training from the retired Assassin, Achilles Davenport, who later inducts him into the order and nicknames him Connor in memory of his dead son, deceased in the American Revolution. Through him, Connor meets Patriots in the Revolution, helping them to stop several Templar plans, including an assassination attempt against George Washington. Between memories, Desmond helps his allies to recover power sources to power the Temple scattered about the globe, including one held by Abstergo.

Connor eventually faces his father, who offers a ceasefire, as he is also after Benjamin Church for usurping his authority. They team up to investigate, Kenway warns Connor about the Patriots, seeking to remove Connors people from their lands due to fear of an allegiance against the British. Connor eventually hunts and kills Lee, takes the medallion and ends the Templar threat. He is despondent to find his tribes village abandoned save for the Piece of Eden; through it, Juno tells him to hide the amulet. Desmond wakes up on December 21, and with his allies finds the buried medallion, key to the inner Temple door, behind is a control sphere capable of stopping the solar flare. Juno appears and encourages Desmond to touch it, but Minerva appears and warns him not to, as it would release Juno as an entity that would protect against the solar flare, but would also be a threat to mankinds future. Juno says Minerva would rather have most of humanity wiped out, and Desmond survive to be a religious figure to lead the survivors, ultimately leading into conflict. Desmond opts to release Juno, believing humanity will have a better chance fighting Juno. The energy from the control sphere, protects Earth from the solar flare, but kills Desmond. Juno tells Desmonds corpse that his work is now done, and now it is time for her to work.

Assassins Creed III is structured similarly to the previous games, with missions taking place on an openworld map based on Colonial Boston and New York, and offers a large wilderness area, the Frontier and in the Davenport Homestead, where the player can hunt animals for materials, which then subsequently can be used to construct goods to be traded and sold throughout the colonies. Naval battles were introduced, wherein the player must steer a warship named Aquila in dangerous waters and perform shiptoship combat with cannons and mounted guns. In Assassins Creed III there are a large assortment of side missions to play and many different outfits to purchase as the player progresses through the game. The modernday aspects of the story were also significantly expanded, and featured missions taking place in, among other locations, Manhattan, Rome and Brazil.

Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag
Main article: Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag
Samples taken from Desmond Miles body in the moments after his death have enabled Abstergo Industries to continue to explore his genetic memories using the Animus newfound cloud computing abilities. The unnamed player character is hired by Abstergos entertainment division to sift through the memories of Edward Kenway, an eighteenthcentury pirate and the grandfather of Connor. Ostensibly, this is to gather material for an Animuspowered interactive video game, but in reality, Abstergo and the Templars are searching for the Observatory, a Precursor structure that allows the user to see through the eyes of a subject. As Kenway, the player must unravel a conspiracy between highranking Templars to manipulate the British, Spanish and French empires into locating the Sage  later identified as Bartholomew Roberts  who is the only man who can lead them to the Observatory.

In the present day, the player is contacted by John, Abstergo Entertainments information technology manager. John convinces the player that his employer knows more than they are telling, and encourages them to investigate in more detail. He arranges for the player to access the Animus core, at which point Juno materialises into an incorporeal form. She reveals that although it was necessary to open her temple to avert disaster, the world was not ready for her, and she is unable to affect it or possess the player character as her agents intended. John is unmasked as the reincarnated form of the Sage and attempts to murder the player to cover up the failed attempt at resurrecting Juno, but is killed by Abstergos security before he can do so. As Roberts, the Sage admits to Kenway that he owes no allegiance to the Assassins or the Templars and instead uses whoever he thinks represents his best chance of achieving his ends.

Assassins Creed Rogue
Main article: Assassins Creed Rogue
The plot follows AssassinturnedTemplar, Shay Patrick Cormac, and is set during the Seven Years War across various locations in northeastern North America and the North Atlantic.10 It is meant to fill the gaps of the story between III and Black Flag and has a crucial link to the Kenway saga, as well as connecting to Unity.11 Haytham Kenway from III and Adwal from Black Flag make appearances.12

By March 2014, a game titled or codenamed Comet, was revealed to be in development, for release on PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360.13 By the end of the month, additional reports indicated that Comet would be set around 1758 in New York, as well as feature sailing on the Atlantic Ocean. The game would be a direct sequel to Black Flag, and would be the first to feature a Templar as the main protagonist, named Shay. In May 2014, Guillemot stated that Assassins Creed games would continue releasing on the last generation PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 for the foreseeable future, despite the franchise moving to the current generation PlayStation 4 and Xbox One with Assassins Creed Unity.14 On August 5, Ubisoft officially announced the game as Assassins Creed Rogue. It was released in North America on the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 on November 11, 201410 and in Europe and Australasia on November 13, 2014.15 It was released on Windows in March 2015.16 In January 2018, a remastered version was announced for release on PlayStation 4, Xbox One and Microsoft Windows in 2018.

Assassins Creed Unity
Main article: Assassins Creed Unity
The story is set in Paris on the eve of the French Revolution and follows Arno Dorian and his fellow assassins as Dorian attempts to avenge his foster fathers death, as well as discover Templar infighting as a result of the Revolution. 17

On March 19, 2014, images leaked for the next game, titled or codenamed Unity, showing a new assassin in Paris.13 On March 21, Ubisoft confirmed the games existence, having been in development for more than three years, by releasing prealpha game footage.18 The game features up to four player coop, a first for the series.19 It was released in North America for PlayStation 4, Xbox One and Windows on November 11, 2014 and in Europe and Australasia on November 13, 2014.15

Assassins Creed Syndicate
Main article: Assassins Creed Syndicate
The plot is set in Victorian era London and follows twin assassins Jacob and Evie Frye as they navigate the corridors of organized crime, and take back the city from Templar control.

In December 2014, images and information leaked for a new Assassins Creed game, titled or codenamed Victory, which was later confirmed by Ubisoft.20 In May 2015, Kotaku leaked that Victory had been renamed Syndicate.21 On May 12, 2015, the game was officially announced by Ubisoft.22 The PlayStation 4 and the Xbox One version of the game was released on October 23, 2015, while the Microsoft Windows version was released on November 19, 2015.23

Assassins Creed Origins
Main article: Assassins Creed Origins
The story is set in Ptolemaic Egypt and follows a Medjay named Bayek, whose fight to protect his people, leads him to create the Secret Order the Assassins, with the game exploring the origin of their conflict with the Knights of Templar, serving as a prequel to the entire series.

In February 2016, Ubisoft announced they would not be releasing a new game in 2016 in order to step back and reexamine the Assassins Creed franchise... and take the year to evolve the game mechanics and to make sure were delivering on the promise of Assassins Creed offering unique and memorable gameplay experiences.24 On the decision, Guillemot said that Ubisoft started to question the annualized franchise with the release of Assassins Creed Unity, and the fact that Assassins Creed Syndicate had a slower launch than expected. Guillemot added that by moving away from the annual iterations of the franchise, it will give the Assassins Creed teams more time to take advantage of new engines and technology.25 Assassins Creed IV: Black Flags director Ashraf Ismail, commented on an interview that he and the team would be interested in doing an Assassins Creed game in an Ancient Egyptian setting, along with reiterating an earlier statement that a female leading character was not an impossibility for the series.26 In May 2017, Ubisoft confirmed the development of Assassins Creed Origins. It was announced to be set in the Ptolemaic Egypt in June 2017. The game was released worldwide on October 27, 2017 for PlayStation 4, Xbox One and Windows.27

Assassins Creed Odyssey
Main article: Assassins Creed Odyssey
The game takes place during the Peloponnesian War between Athens and Sparta, at the height of Classical Greece. Players choose between two playable protagonists; Alexios and Kassandra, and embark on a quest to discover mysteries surrounding their family, as well as to undermine a protoTemplar organization; the Cult of Kosmos.

Assassins Creed Odyssey was leaked in May 2018 by a picture posted by the French website Jeuxvideo, and it first announced at E3 2018. The game was released on October 5, 2018 for Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 4 and Xbox One.2829

Collections
Assassins Creed: Heritage Collection
Assassins Creed: Heritage Collection collects the first five games of the main series into one collection, featuring Assassins Creed, Assassins Creed II, Assassins Creed: Brotherhood, Assassins Creed: Revelations and Assassins Creed III. Released on PC, PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 on November 8, 2013.30

Assassins Creed: The Americas Collection
Assassins Creed: The Americas Collection, developed by Ubisoft Montreal, features Assassins Creed III, Assassins Creed: Liberation HD and Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag, for the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360. The collection was released on October 28, 2014.

Assassins Creed: The Ezio Collection
Assassins Creed: The Ezio Collection, developed by Virtuos and Ubisoft Montreal, features remastered versions of Assassins Creed II, Assassins Creed: Brotherhood and Assassins Creed: Revelations singleplayer modes, using the Anvil engine, for the PlayStation 4 and Xbox One the multiplayer being excluded from the package. The games feature improved graphics, lighting, effects and textures, and also include all previously released downloadable content for the singleplayer. In addition, the bundle features the short films Assassins Creed: Embers and Assassins Creed: Lineage. The collection was released on November 15, 2016 to mixed reviews,3132 being generally criticized for its minimal graphical enhancements, the dated gameplay, and the capped 30 frames per second.3334

Other console games
Assassins Creed III: Liberation
Main article: Assassins Creed III: Liberation
The story follows a Louisiana Creole woman, named Aveline.35 Aveline is the daughter of a French merchant father and an African mother. She is recruited into the Assassin Order by a former slave and fights against slavery as well as the Templars.

An original Assassins Creed title for the PlayStation Vita was announced to be in development during Gamescom 2011, and would feature a new story with new characters. On June 4, 2012 at E3, Liberation was officially announced.36 Aveline uses a variety of new weapons in combat, including a machete and a blowpipe for ranged attacks. On September 10, 2013, it was announced that the game would be rereleased as Assassins Creed: Liberation HD for PlayStation 3, Xbox 360 and Microsoft Windows via the PlayStation Network, Xbox Live Arcade and Steam, respectively, in January 2014.37

Assassins Creed Chronicles
Main article: Assassins Creed Chronicles
Assassins Creed Chronicles is an episodic 2.5D action game for Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 4, PlayStation Vita and Xbox One. The first episode is available with the purchase of Assassins Creed Unitys DLC season pass and features Shao Jun in 16th century China.38 The second entry, India, was released on January 12, 2016 on the same platforms, and the last entry, Russia, was released on February 9, 2016.39

Handheld and mobile games
Assassins Creed: Altars Chronicles
Main article: Assassins Creed: Altars Chronicles
Altar IbnLaAhad is sent on a mission from the Order of Assassins to retrieve a Chalice from the grasps of both the Crusaders and the Saracens. Altar quests to find three different magic keys then travels to Jerusalem to face the head of the Knights Templar, Basilisk. Upon arriving, he learns that the Chalice is not an object, but a woman named Adha who reveals that Altar has been deceived by an assassin named Harash, who is now a doubleagent for the Templars. After killing both Harash and Basilisk, Altar attempts to save a kidnapped Adha from captivity but is too late. The game ends with a captured Adha sailing away and Altar left in the holy land.

Assassins Creed: Bloodlines
Main article: Assassins Creed: Bloodlines
Altar has traveled to Cyprus from the Holy Land in order to assassinate the last remnants of the Templars. Here Altar again meets Maria and they travel together to kill the remaining Templars and learn more about the Apple of Eden and the mysterious Templar Archive where more of the artifacts are believed to be hidden. Altar manages to kill the new Templar Grand Master, Armand Bouchart, and his followers, but the Archives contents are discovered to have already been taken from Cyprus.

Assassins Creed II: Discovery
Main article: Assassins Creed II: Discovery
After losing the Apple of Eden to Girolamo Savonarola, Ezio is told to meet Antonio, his fellow Assassin. When doing so, Ezio finds Antonio with another man named Luis Santangel, who asks Ezio to rescue his friend Christoffa Corombo from a presumed Templar trap set up by Rodrigo Borgia. Ezio rescues Christoffa from this trap, and is informed that Assassins in Spain are captured and executed by Tomas Torquemada. Ezio, who feels that it is his duty to rescue the Assassins, sets out for Spain to fight back against the Spanish Inquisition. Along the way, Ezio finds out that Torquemada was ordered to commit these actions by Rodrigo Borgia, who leads Torquemada to believe that God desired it so. Ezio also finds out that his close allies, Luis Santangel and Raphael Sanchez, are in fact Assassins themselves. When finally confronting Torquemada, Ezio chooses not to kill him thinking that Torquemada is merely misled by Borgia and not a Templar himself. Ezio then returns to Italy to continue his search for the Apple of Eden.

Assassins Creed: Recollection
Assassins Creed: Recollection is a realtime board game developed for iOS. The game delivers a new experience to the Assassins Creed world in which fans and new players alike go headtohead in realtime political battles with characters from the franchise. Players can also unlock a collection of artwork, spanning the series. The game features over 280 Memories, reconnecting with characters from Assassins Creed II and Assassins Creed: Brotherhood. The singleplayer Story Mode has 10 hours of gameplay, with 20 missions taking place from Barcelona to Constantinople and 10 challenge missions. In Versus Mode, players can challenge their friends and people from around the world, pitting their strategies and abilities against one another. The game supports Game Center, allowing players to track achievements, challenge friends, and play against the world over. Go behinds the scenes with the Art Gallery, a collection of artwork spanning the entire franchise Assassins Creed, Assassins Creed II, Assassins Creed: Brotherhood, Assassins Creed: Revelations and Assassins Creed III showcasing the high level of quality in character design as well as the attention to detail in the locations. Through the Store, players have the option to Buy Packs for the ingame currency, Animus Credits Animus Credits may also be purchased through an InApp Purchase, or to BuySell Memories fromto other players in the Market. The short film Assassins Creed: Embers is also featured within the game.40

Assassins Creed: Multiplayer Rearmed
Assassins Creed: Multiplayer Rearmed is a multiplayer video game designed for iOS. It is the only Assassins Creed Multiplayer driven by an ingame economy. The aim is to assassinate the assigned target and avoid being killed by your own hunter. The player can purchase additional items, characters and abilities as well as compete with friends and foes from around the globe in a 4 player realtime online multiplayer mode. Players can connect via Game Center using either WIFI or 3G. It is also possible to play against someone in the immediate area via Bluetooth. Available map locations include Jerusalem, San Donato, Venice and Alhambra.41

Assassins Creed: Pirates
Assassins Creed: Pirates is a mobile game, that was released on iOS and Android devices on December 5, 2013.42 Developed by Ubisoft Paris,43 the game follows Captain Alonzo Batilla, who is neither Assassin nor Templar, as he commands a ship and crew, while crossing paths with the Assassins and Templars. Gameplay focuses on realtime battles between ships. The title is in 3D and features both wind and weather that will affect how players proceed.44

Assassins Creed Memories
Assassins Creed Memories is a mobile game that was released on iOS devices on August 20, 2014. Developed along with PlayNext and Gree, the game combines card collection and battling, target chasing, and strategy elements, along with the option of competitive multiplayer. Additional multiplayer options include allowing players to join a guild and then engage in 20 vs 20 guild combat scenarios. Memories features different historical eras, including the Third Crusade, the golden age of piracy, feudal Japan and the Mongolian Empire.45

Assassins Creed Identity
Main article: Assassins Creed Identity
Assassins Creed Identity is a game for iOS and Android devices that was released worldwide on February 25, 2016. It is a 3D thirdperson roleplaying game. It had a softlaunch in Australia and New Zealand in 2014.46

Cancelled and defunct games
Assassins Creed: Project Legacy
Assassins Creed: Project Legacy was a singleplayer browserbased roleplaying game Facebook application, designed as a promotion, and tiein for Assassins Creed: Brotherhood. The game is mostly textbased, but includes graphics and sound as well as some video.

Players are test subjects for Abstergo Industries who relive the lives of other test subjects Assassin ancestors; instead of using the Animus, players use the Data Dump Scanner DDS.

The first mission pack is titled Italian Wars, and is divided into four chapters. Chapter one focuses on Bartolomeo dAlviano during the Battle of Agnadello. The second chapter focuses on Francesco Vecellio on a mission to kill Niccol di Pitigliano cousin of Bartolomeo dAlviano. The third focuses on Mario Auditore and the protection of Monteriggioni. The fourth and final chapter focuses on Perotto Calderon, an undercover assassin who watches over Lucrezia Borgia, with whom he falls in love.

The second mission pack, entitled Rome, was released November 16, 2010. The first chapter takes place between 1497 and 1503, and deals with the excourtesan, Fiora Cavazza. It deals with Fioras involvement in recruiting an army for the Borgia, and her subsequent betrayal. The second takes place in 1503, and involves Giovanni Borgia, fleeing his family and eventually joining the assassins. Chapter three involves Francesco Vecellio, and his training to be an assassin under Ezio Auditore. Chapter four again focuses on Giovanni Borgia, now an Assassin and joining Hernn Corts on his journey to Tenochtitlan to acquire a Piece of Eden, one of the Crystal Skulls. Giovanni brought it to Bombastus for study, resulting in the discovery of the formula for the Philosophers stone.

The third mission pack, entitled Holidays, and its first Chapter called Ghosts of Christmas Past were released on December 21, 2010 with further missions to be released in 2011.needs update The first chapter takes place at various times and places in history: during the World War I Christmas Truce, the Beagle 2 truth, the return of Charles II back to England, and the time of the Shroud of Turin.

A fourth story pack, The Divine Science Story Pack was announced, but never released. Additionally, an updated user interface referred to as the DDS 2.0 was announced, but not released. The DDS 2.0 would have offered an easier method of selecting mission packs and equipment.

The game was later shut down and put on an indefinite hold.

Assassins Creed: Utopia
Assassins Creed: Utopia is a cancelled mobile game which was planned to be available on Android and iOS devices.4748 The games story would have led into Assassins Creed III, though there would have been no links in terms of gameplay.49

Utopia would have taken place in the 17th century, at the very beginning of the colonization of North America. Gameplay would have spanned 150 years of history, to help players discover how the Assassins influenced history and helped shape the nations original thirteen colonies.50 The gameplay involved building a colonial city, and was planned to have more of a social slant than any of the earlier games.citation needed The Assassins of each colony would have taken on their enemies in limited time epic battles, and players would have been able to pit their strength against friends in asynchronous 3D brawls.50

Future
Asked about the future of the series in 2009, Sbastien Puel from Ubisoft said that we could do 35 of these Assassins Creed games,51 while Laurent Detoc from Ubisoft later said we hope to reach Assassins Creed 10.52

In November 2011, a Ubisoft survey was sent out, asking participants which locations and time periods they would like to see in the next Assassins Creed games. These settings were Medieval China, Victorian England, Ancient Egypt, the Portuguese andor Spanish Invasion of the Americas, the American Revolution, the Russian Revolution, Feudal Japan, and Ancient Rome.53 Alex Hutchinson, creative director of Assassins Creed III, suggested the most requested Assassins Creed settings, World War II, Feudal Japan and Ancient Egypt, are the three worst settings for an Assassins Creed game.54 However, Hutchinson stated both he and Corey May were open to the idea of a future entry set during the time of the British Raj,55 which now consists of the modern states of India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, and Myanmar. Victorian England, the American Revolution, Medieval China, parts of the British Raj, the Russian Revolution, and Ancient Egypt were subsequently used for Assassins Creed Syndicate, Assassins Creed III, Assassins Creed Chronicles, and Assassins Creed Origins, respectively, with World War I appearing as a section of Syndicate, and World War II as an easter egg in Unity.

In June 2013, Ubisoft CEO Yves Guillemot stated on the development cycle of the games, saying, We are making sure the teams who are creating the different iterations have enough timetwo years, three years, so that they can take risk and they can change the concept enough so that it can be appealing and fresh.56 The following August, Assassins Creed IV: Black Flags director Ashraf Ismail said that the ending of the franchise had been written, saying We have an idea of where the end is, what the end is. But of course Yves Guillemot announced we are a yearly title, we ship one game a year. So depending on the setting, depending on what fans want, weve given ourselves room to fit more in this arc. But there is an end.57

In other media
Ubisoft expanded the Assassins Creed franchise to other media, including films, comic books and novels.

Television
In November 2016, it was announced that Ubisoft and Netflix started talks regarding how to develop an Assassins Creed series.58 In July 2017, Adi Shankar revealed he would be creating the series, which would be in the anime format.59 The series, which will feature an original story from Shankar, will share the same universe as the other media of the franchise.60

Films
Theatrical
Main article: Assassins Creed film
A liveaction film, Assassins Creed, set in the same universe as the video games and other media,61 was released on December 21, 2016 to negative reviews.6263 Development for the film began in October 2011, when Sony Pictures entered final negotiations with Ubisoft Motion Pictures to make the film.64 In July 2012, Michael Fassbender was announced to star in the film, as well as coproduce the film.65 His role was revealed in August 2015 as Callum Lynch, whose ancestor Aguilar, is an assassin from 15thcentury Spain.66 In October 2012, Ubisoft revealed the film would no longer be produced by Sony Pictures, instead coproduced with New Regency and distributed by 20th Century Fox.67 In January 2013, Michael Lesslie was hired to write the film,68 with Scott Frank, Adam Cooper and Bill Collage performing rewrites to the script.6970 By the end of April 2014, Justin Kurzel was in talks to direct.71 Principal photography began on August 31, 2015,667273 and ended on January 15, 2016.74 Released on December 21, 2016, the film was poorly received by critics though performed adequately at the box office.

Short films
Assassins Creed: Lineage
Main article: Assassins Creed: Lineage
Assassins Creed: Lineage is a 36minute film serving as a prequel to Assassins Creed II.7576 The film, released in three parts on YouTube, promoted the game and is the first attempt for Ubisoft to make its first step in the film industry.77 It is about the story of Giovanni Auditore, Ezios father, who investigates the mysterious assassination of Duke of Milan Galeazzo Maria Sforza and first learns about Rodrigo Borgias conspiracy.78

Assassins Creed: Ascendance
Originally named Secret Project Number Three,79 Ascendance is an animated short by UbiWorkshop and Ubisoft Montreal, which bridges the gap between Assassins Creed II and Assassins Creed: Brotherhood.80 It tells the backstory of Cesare Borgias rise to power. The animated short was revealed by UbiWorkshop on 10 November 2010.81 It was released on November 16, 2010 for Xbox Live, PlayStation Store and iTunes Store.82 The short story takes place in the middle of the events of Brotherhood as Ezio Auditore sits and gathers information about Cesare Borgia, from a hooded man who is later revealed to be Leonardo da Vinci.

Assassins Creed: Embers
Main article: Assassins Creed: Embers
The short film follows an elderly Ezio, living a peaceful life in the Tuscan countryside with his wife Sofia and his children Flavia and Marcello and writing his memoirs. One day a stranger appears, a Chinese female Assassin called Shao Jun, who came to Ezio in order to seek knowledge of his life as an Assassin. Although Ezio prefers that Jun not stay, due to his desire to leave his days as an Assassin behind, Sofia allows her to stay for the night. The next day, Ezio catches Jun reading his memoirs and bids her to leave, but relents after she asks him about what it means to be an Assassin. While on a trip to Firenze, Ezio then recounts his story of how his father and brothers were executed in the town square, forcing him to become an Assassin, and how such a life is defined by the pain it brings and causes. As they leave, the two are attacked by a stranger, who appears to be of Asian origin as well. After killing him, Jun reveals that she was a former concubine, now on the run from servants of the Chinese Zhengde Emperor, and explains how her former master rescued her from his influence. After returning to his home, Ezio tells Sofia and his children to leave, knowing that others would come. He then teaches Jun the key to liberating her people from the Emperors influence. Later that night, Ezios villa is attacked by more of Shao Juns enemies, and after a fight, he successfully eliminates them all. The next morning, Ezio hands Shao Jun a small box and tells her it may come to use one day, but only if you lose your way. He then sends her away as two riders appear at the villa. Sometime afterward Ezio journeys to Firenze with his wife Sofia and their daughter Flavia, despite suffering from heart problems. While resting on a bench and after having a short conversation with a young man with a scar on his face, similar to the sort of man he used to be, he exhales and dies in view of his family. The film then ends as a final letter from Ezio to Sofia is read, saying that of all the things that kept him going throughout life, love for the world around him was the strongest of them all.

Comics
Assassins Creed: Graphic Novel
In the limited edition of Assassins Creed, an 8page graphic novel was included, that showed two sidestories of Altar IbnLaAhad and Desmond Miles. The story serves as a prelude to the first Assassins Creed game and is narrated simultaneously by both characters. In it, the novel covers Desmonds escape from Abstergo in the year 2012 and also one of Altars assassination missions in the year 1191. The start of the novel involves the introduction of the two characters with Altar calling himself a hunter, while Desmond is a prisoner. Although initially they describe themselves otherwise, by the end of the novel they both reintroduce themselves as assassins.

Assassins Creed, Volume 1: Desmond
Assassins Creed Volume 1: Desmond is a Frenchlanguage graphic novel written by Eric Corbeyran and drawn by Djilalli Defaux. It has been released in France, Canada, Belgium, Poland and Italy. The comic book was published on November 13, 2009, a few days before Assassins Creed II was released.83 The story is a retelling of events from Assassins Creed and the beginning of Assassins Creed II, mostly from Desmonds modern perspective; for example it is revealed that Lucy helped the Templars to kidnap Desmond. It also features Subject 16 referred to as Michael and a Roman assassin named Aquilus. However, events in the comic book are different from what happens in the game. It is said that Subject 16 is alive but trapped in the animus, a virtual reality simulator used to relive memories of ancient relatives, but theres no mention of Shaun or Rebecca.84

Assassins Creed, Volume 2: Aquilus
Assassins Creed Volume 2: Aquilus is a Frenchlanguage graphic novel written by Eric Corbeyran and drawn by Djilalli Defaux. The story opens with a young Desmond recalling his conversation with his father. He wakes up and has a conversation with Lucy. After meeting Rebecca, Shaun and other assassins, they get into a truck and drive to Monteriggioni.

In the meantime, Desmond relives memories of Aquilus through the animus after his apparent death in the first volume. The Roman assassin is rescued by his cousin, Accipiter, and is tasked with a quest to save Lugdunum. He meets with his father and discovers an artifact of the first civilization: an ankh which can temporarily revive the dead. The mysterious object is then stolen by a Templar senator, Vultur, who kills Aquilus father.

The modern day story continues as Assassins fight Abstergo agents when theyre ambushed on the road. Later, it is revealed that theres a traitor among in the Assassins truck, and Desmond deals with the situation. The group finally arrives in Monteriggioni and at the end, its hinted that the ankh artifact might be hidden within the towns walls.

Assassins Creed, Volume 3: Accipiter
Jonathan Hawk was sent by a suited executive and a lab technician to relive Accipiters memories. He was sent to 259 CE, when Accipiters Alamans were crossing the Rodanus into Genava and Aube to face the Roman forces at Oppidum. The battle raged bloodily and long, but Accipiters forces were eventually victorious. Accipiter was met by the Iberian Assassin Cuervo after the battle, the latter coming to congratulate the Alamans on their victory and to discuss the future.

Assassins Creed, Volume 4: Hawk
Assassins Creed, Volume 4: Hawk is the fourth volume of the French graphic novels. It is centered on the story of Jonathan Hawk and his Egyptian ancestor Numa AlKhamsin, a member of the Assassins in the 14th century. It was released on November 16, 2012.

Assassins Creed, Volume 5: El Cakr
Assassins Creed, Volume 5: El Cakr is the fifth volume of the French graphic novels. It is centered on the story of Jonathan Hawk and his Egyptian ancestor Numa AlKhamsin, also known as El Cakr. It was released on October 31, 2013.

Assassins Creed, Volume 6: Leila
Assassins Creed, Volume 6: Leila is the sixth volume of the French graphic novels. It is centered on the story of Jonathan Hawk and his Egyptian ancestor Numa AlKhamsin, also known as El Cakr. It is the last of the Egyptian storyline. It was released on October 31, 2014.

Assassins Creed: The Fall
Main article: Assassins Creed: The Fall
In July 2010, Ubisoft announced a threepart comic book miniseries set in the world of Assassins Creed as a part of their UbiWorkshop initiative.85 Ubisoft has hired illustrators Cameron Stewart and Karl Kerschl, both winners of multiple comic book awards.86 The first issue of the series was released on November 10, 2010, the second part on December 1, 2010. It was published by WildStorm.87 The comic takes place between 1888 and 1908 in Russia and 1998 set in the United States. It follows Nikolai Orelov and his descendant Daniel Cross, a recovering alcoholic experiencing the bleeding effect in a therapists office.

Assassins Creed: The Chain
Main article: Assassins Creed: The Chain
The Chain is a sequel comic to The Fall that completes Nikolai Orelovs story as well as focusing on his descendant, Daniel Cross. The comic will also provide some light on the events of Assassins Creed III. It was released in mid2012.88

Assassins Creed: Brahman
Main article: Assassins Creed: Brahman
Brahman is set in 19th century India, and introduced the Assassin Arbaaz Mir. It was written by Brendan Fletcher with art by Cameron Stewart and Karl Kerschl. It was released in late2013 in North America.89

Assassins Creed: Trial by Fire
Main article: Assassins Creed: Trial by Fire
Oscillating between contemporary San Diego and the Salem witch trials, Assassins Creed follows Charlotte de la Cruz, an overeducated conspiracy theorist, who soon comes under attack from Templars after learning she is the descendent of Assassins.90 The series is published by Titan Comics, and is written by Kill Shakespeares Anthony Del Col and Conor McCreery, illustrated by Neil Edwards, and coloured by Ivan Nunes.91

Manga
Assassins Creed: Awakening was an adaptation of Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag in 2013.92

Novels
Main article: Assassins Creed book series
Assassins Creed: Renaissance
Assassins Creed: Renaissance is a novel based on the Assassins Creed series written by Oliver Bowden and published by Penguin Books. It is a novelised version of the game Assassins Creed II; however, rather than spanning a vast period of time, it is set only in the 15th century with no mention of the series presentday events.

Assassins Creed: Brotherhood
Assassins Creed: Brotherhood is a continuation of the Assassins Creed series written by Oliver Bowden and published by Penguin Books. It is a novelized version of the game Assassins Creed: Brotherhood just like its previous book. It does not contain any of the games presentday events including Desmond, only a reference to a phantom by Ezio. Unlike the events of the game which start in 1499, this version of the story starts in 1503.

Assassins Creed: The Secret Crusade
Assassins Creed: The Secret Crusade is the third Assassins Creed book by Oliver Bowden and published by Penguin Books. The story is told by Niccol Polo, father of Marco Polo, and is about the life of Altar IbnLaAhad. It was released on June 20, 2011.93

Assassins Creed: Revelations
Assassins Creed: Revelations is the fourth novel in the continuation of the Assassins Creed series written by Oliver Bowden and published by Penguin Books. The novel release date is November 24, 2011 for the United Kingdom and November 29, 2011 for the North America. Like the previous novels of Renaissance and Brotherhood, it is a novelised version of the game Assassins Creed: Revelations. Additionally like the prior novels, it does not contain any of the games presentday events including Desmond. Like the game, Ezio Auditore must leave his life behind in search of answers, in search of the truth. In Assassins Creed: Revelations, master assassin Ezio Auditore walks in the footsteps of the legendary mentor Altair, on a journey of discovery and revelation. It is a perilous pathone that will take Ezio to Constantinople, the heart of the Ottoman Empire, where a growing army of Templars threatens to destabilise the region.94

Assassins Creed: Forsaken
Assassins Creed: Forsaken is a continuation of the Assassins Creed series written by Oliver Bowden. It covers the life of Haytham Kenway during his years before and during the events of Assassins Creed III.

Assassins Creed: Black Flag
Assassins Creed: Black Flag is a continuation of the Assassins Creed series written by Oliver Bowden. The novel chronicles the events of the game with the same name. It was released on November 7, 2013.

Assassins Creed: Unity
Assassins Creed: Unity is a continuation of the Assassins Creed series written by Oliver Bowden. The novel focuses on the events of the game from Elises and Arnos perspectives. It was released on November 20, 2014.

Assassins Creed: Underworld
Assassins Creed Underworld unveils the story of Master Assassin Henry GreenJayadeep Mir, the son of Indian Master Assassin Arbaaz Mir and his wife Pyara Kaur the two debuted in Assassins Creed: Brahman, six years before the events depicted in Assassins Creed: Syndicate.

Assassins Creed: Desert Oath
Assassins Creed: Desert Oath is an account of Bayeks early years. The book is a prequel to Assassins Creed: Origins game and revolves around how a young Bayek follows in his father, Sabus footsteps to become a Medjay and more. The book further explains why the Order wants Medjay bloodline erased.

Board games
A board game called Assassins Creed: Arena was launched on February 26, 2014.95 On it appeared typical characters of Assassins Creed: Revelations, like Shahkulu, Anacletos, Odai Dunqas and Oksana Razin.96

On 17 September 2018 it was announced by Triton Noir the launch of a new board game called Assassins Creed: Brotherhood of Venice.97 It will take place in 1509 with Ezio Auditore da Firenze, Leonardo da Vinci, and Lucrezia Borgia; but it also include new characters like Alessandra.98 It was developed by Thibaud de la Touanne,99 it will have more than 20 hours of play,100 and it will be released in November.101

Assassins Creed: Encyclopedia
UbiWorkshop released an encyclopedia of the Assassins Creed series in 2011. Initially intended as an art book, the project gathered so much material that the company decided to expand it into an encyclopedia. It features works of artists, such as Craig Mullins, Tavis Coburn, 123Klan, Gabz and James NG. Artists were given creative freedom, as they were able to create a unique Assassin from the period of their choosing. The art book contains a carte blanche section, which is going to contain fansubmitted artwork.102103

In November 2012, to coincide with the release of Assassins Creed III, UbiWorkshop released a second edition of the encyclopedia. This Edition contained an additional 120 pages of content, covering both Assassins Creed III and Assassins Creed: The Chain, as well as revised content based on feedback.104

The Third Edition of the Assassins Creed: Encyclopedia is an updated hardcover edition incorporating information of characters and events from Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag and Assassins Creed: Brahman along with new artwork and concept art. It was released worldwide on November 11, 2013 and includes 390 pages of new content and a revised version of the second edition, which is also available to purchase from UbiWorkshop.105

Reception
Aggregate review scores
As of October 1, 2018.
GameMetacritic
Assassins CreedPC 79106
PS3 81107
X360 81108
Altars ChroniclesNDS 58109
BloodlinesPSP 63110
IIPC 86111
PS3 91112
X360 90113
II: DiscoveryNDS 69114
BrotherhoodPC 88115
PS3 90116
X360 89117
RevelationsPC 80118
PS3 80119
X360 80120
IIIPC 80121
PS3 85122
WIIU 85123
X360 84124
III: LiberationPC 66125
PS3 64126
Vita 70127
X360 62128
IV: Black FlagPC 84129
PS3 88130
PS4 83131
WIIU 86132
X360 86133
RoguePC 74134
PS3 72135
X360 72136
IdentityiOS 69137
UnityPC 70138
PS4 70139
XONE 72140
Chronicles: ChinaPC 67141
PS4 69142
XONE 67143
SyndicatePC 74144
PS4 76145
XONE 78146
Chronicles: IndiaPC 63147
PS4 63148
XONE 64149
Chronicles: RussiaPS4 60150
XONE 62151
OriginsPC 84152
PS4 81153
XONE 85154
OdysseyPC NA155
PS4 86156
XONE 88157
The Assassins Creed series have received mainly positive reviews from critics, many of whom have called Assassins Creed ...the standout series on the seventh generation of consoles.158 It has been praised for its ambitious game design, visuals, and narratives, but criticized for its technical issues and annual releases of installments, which has sometimes led to a general feeling of oversaturation and loss of innovation.159160161162 As of September 2016, the series has sold over 100 million copies, becoming Ubisofts best selling franchise and one of the highest selling video game franchises of all time.163

In popular culture
References in other video game franchises
Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag introduces the character of Olivier Garneau, as the CEO of video game company Abstergo Entertainment who helps Ubisoft to develop the Assassins Creed video games within the franchises fictional plot. During the games plot, Garneau goes to Chicago, the setting of Ubisofts game Watch Dogs. In the latter video game, Garneau is the subject of a side mission that sees playable protagonist Aiden Pearce saving him from being kidnapped, it is implied that by the Assassins Brotherhood. Additionally, two characters in the game are seen playing Assassins Creed II. Ubisoft has described those appearances as small Easter eggs, and has neither confirmed nor denied a shared continuity between both franchises.164 Assassins Creed Origins mentions the news about Garneaus incident in Chicago, along with a picture of Aiden Pearce killing Garneau.165 Ubisoft still has not confirmed a shared continuity, between both video game franchises, but this is the only crossover that seems to imply a shared plot.

In the 2009 Wii game Academy of Champions: Soccer, Altar appears as a playable character along with other Ubisoft characters.166 In the 2012 game Soulcalibur V, Ezio appears as a playable fighter and is featured on the box art.167

Sackboy, the player character from LittleBigPlanet and its sequel, can be costumed as Ezio.168 In Prince of Persia: The Forgotten Sands there is an unlockable outfit through Uplay.169 In Prince of Persia 2008, Altars costume can be unlocked with a code obtained by preordering the game.citation needed Final Fantasy XIII2 has a costume of Ezio from Assassins Creed: Revelations as an optional costume option as downloadable content.170 In PCMac versions of Team Fortress 2, two promotional items were introduced in 2011 months before Assassins Creed: Revelations release. These were both for the class Spy, the first item being the iconic hidden blade, the second a hood based on the one Ezio wore in Revelations.citation needed

In Metal Gear Solid 4: Guns of the Patriots, the outfit of Altar is available as an unlockable, though, originally, it was only an April Fools joke by Hideo Kojima.citation needed Kojima later repaid the favor, by letting Ubisoft borrow the outfit of the Metal Gear Solid character Raiden as an unlockable in Assassins Creed Brotherhood.171 In Metal Gear Solid: Peace Walker, the player can jump into a bale of hay from a rooftop which also includes the Eagle sound effect used in the Assassins Creed games and use it to attract and subdue enemies. The Assassin order is also referenced by a character.172

In downloadable contents, Ubisoft collaborated with Square Enix to held a limitedtime Assassins Creedthemed festival event crossover into the Final Fantasy XV on consoles under the title Assassins Festival,173 starting August 31, 2017 until January 31, 2018. The DLC featuring gameplay elements from the Assassins Creed game series, new additional quests, minigames, and exclusive items from Assassins Creed series.

References in other film franchises
In the 2011 Indian film Velayudham, the superhero costume worn by the protagonist is visibly based on Altars in Assassins Creed.174175

References
 Interview: Assassins Creed. CVG. Archived from the original on October 25, 2012. Retrieved September 2, 2012.
 The Making Of: Assassins Creed. EDGE. August 27, 2012. Archived from the original on December 28, 2013. Retrieved March 3, 2013.
 Moss, Richard October 3, 2018. Assassins Creed: An oral history. Polygon. Retrieved October 3, 2018.
 Bryan Vore March 4, 2013. Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag. Gameinformer.com. Archived from the original on March 6, 2013. Retrieved March 4, 2013.
 George, Richard March 4, 2013. The Dawn of Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag. IGN. Archived from the original on September 30, 2013. Retrieved August 30, 2013.
 Fahey, Mike May 5, 2010. GameStop Placeholder Art Names Assassins Creed: Brotherhood  Update. Kotaku. Archived from the original on August 29, 2014. Retrieved October 21, 2010.
 Bertz, Matt July 20, 2015. Assassins Creed Creator Talks Life After Ubisoft, Again. GameInformer. Archived from the original on August 22, 2017. Retrieved November 29, 2017.
 McNamara, Andy June 11, 2010. Update: Patrice Dsilets Walks Away From Ubisoft And Assassins Creed. GameInformer. Archived from the original on December 1, 2017. Retrieved November 29, 2017.
 Philips, Tom. Assassins Creed: Lost Legacy canned. Eurogamer. Archived from the original on July 18, 2011.
 McWhertor, Michael August 5, 2014. Assassins Creed Rogue confirmed by Ubisoft  heres the first trailer. Polygon. Archived from the original on August 6, 2014. Retrieved August 5, 2014.
 Wallace, Kimberly August 5, 2014. September Cover Revealed  Assassins Creed Rogue And Unity. Game Informer. GameStop. Archived from the original on August 5, 2014. Retrieved August 5, 2014.
 Schreier, Jason March 27, 2014. Sources: Assassins Creed Comet Will Let You Play As A Templar. Kotaku. Archived from the original on March 28, 2014. Retrieved March 27, 2014.
 Schreier, Jason March 19, 2014. Leaked Images Reveal One Of This Falls Two Assassins Creed Games. Kotaku. Archived from the original on March 19, 2014. Retrieved March 19, 2014.
 Watts, Steve May 15, 2014. Assassins Creed Games Coming To PS3, Xbox 360 For Foreseeable Future. IGN. Archived from the original on May 16, 2014. Retrieved May 16, 2014.
 Karmali, Luke August 28, 2014. Assassins Creed Unity Release Date Delayed To November. IGN. Archived from the original on August 30, 2014. Retrieved August 28, 2014.
 Futter, Mike October 13, 2014. Assassins Creed Rogue Coming To PC In 2015. Game Informer. GameStop. Archived from the original on October 14, 2014. Retrieved October 13, 2014.
 Lien, Tracey June 9, 2014. Assassins Creed Unity hits Oct. 28, preorders live. Polygon. Archived from the original on June 13, 2014. Retrieved June 9, 2014.
 Karmali, Luke March 21, 2014. Ubisoft Confirms Assassins Creed: Unity, Release Date Teased. IGN. Archived from the original on March 22, 2014. Retrieved March 21, 2014.
 Jackson, Leah B. June 9, 2014. E3 2014: Assassins Creed Unity CoOp Revealed. IGN. Archived from the original on June 10, 2014. Retrieved June 9, 2014.
 Schreier, Jason December 1, 2014. Next Years Big Assassins Creed Is Set In Victorian London UPDATE. Kotaku. Archived from the original on December 3, 2014. Retrieved December 4, 2014.
 Schreier, Jason. Next Assassins Creed To Be Announced Next Week; Now Called Syndicate. Archived from the original on May 8, 2015. Retrieved May 7, 2015.
 Sarker, Samit May 12, 2015. Assassins Creed Syndicate announced, set in Victorian London. Polygon. Retrieved May 12, 2015.
 Phillips, Tom May 12, 2015. Assassins Creed: Syndicate launches 23rd October on PS4, Xbox One. Eurogamer. Archived from the original on May 14, 2015. Retrieved May 13, 2015.
 A MESSAGE FROM THE ASSASSINS CREED TEAM. Ubisoft. February 11, 2016. Archived from the original on August 15, 2017. Retrieved February 11, 2016.
 Macy, Seth G. February 11, 2016. UBISOFT CONFIRMS NO ASSASSINS CREED THIS YEAR. IGN. Archived from the original on August 15, 2017. Retrieved February 11, 2016.
 Mitch Dyer October 10, 2013. Assassins Creed 4 Director on Egypt Setting, Future of Franchise. IGN. Retrieved October 10, 2013.
 Phillips, Tom May 16, 2017. Ubisoft confirms Far Cry 5 and The Crew 2. Eurogamer. Gamer Network. Archived from the original on May 21, 2017. Retrieved May 22, 2017.
 Lawler, Richard 1 June 2018. Assassins Creed: Odyssey takes the series to ancient Greece. Engadget. Oath Tech Network AOL Tech. Retrieved 2 June 2018.
 Kim, Matt 31 May 2018. Assassins Creed Odyssey Set in Ancient Greece Confirmed for E3. US Gamer. Gamer Network. Retrieved 2 June 2018.
 Karmali, Luke October 4, 2013. Assassins Creed Heritage Collection announced for Europe. IGN. Retrieved November 30, 2017.
 Driver, Ben. Assassins Creed: The Ezio Collection for PlayStation 4 Reviews. Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on November 25, 2016. Retrieved January 2, 2017.
 Driver, Ben. Assassins Creed: The Ezio Collection for Xbox One Reviews. Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on December 31, 2016. Retrieved January 2, 2017.
 Assassins Creed: The Ezio Collection Review. IGN. Archived from the original on December 1, 2016. Retrieved January 2, 2017.
 Assassins Creed: The Ezio Collection review  Italian job. Metro. GameCentral for Metro.co.uk. Archived from the original on January 3, 2017. Retrieved January 2, 2017.
 Gamescom: Assassins Creed, Rayman on Vita  PSP News at IGN. Psp.ign.com. Archived from the original on March 5, 2012. Retrieved August 15, 2012.
 Sony announces white PS Vita bundle with Assassins Creed III: Liberation. Engadget. Archived from the original on August 15, 2012. Retrieved August 15, 2012.
 Lewis, Anne October 24, 2013. ASSASSINS CREED LIBERATION HD  RELEASE DATE AND PREORDER BONUSES. UbiBlog. Ubisoft. Archived from the original on October 27, 2013. Retrieved October 24, 2013.
 Marchiafavra, Jeff September 22, 2014. Assassins Creed Unity Season Pass Includes Newly Announced 2.5D Downloadable Title. Game Informer. GameStop. Archived from the original on September 24, 2014. Retrieved September 22, 2014.
 Assassins Creed Chronicles Trilogy Announced. IGN. March 31, 2014. Archived from the original on March 31, 2015. Retrieved March 31, 2014.
 Assassins Creed Recollection for iPhone 3GS, iPhone 4, iPhone 4S, iPhone 5, iPod touch 2nd generation, iPod touch 3rd generation, iPod touch 4th generation, iPod touch 5th generation, and iPad on the iTunes App Store. itunes.apple.com. August 18, 2012. Archived from the original on July 2, 2013. Retrieved November 30, 2012.
 Assassins Creed Rearmed for iPhone 3GS, iPhone 4, iPhone 4S, iPod touch 2nd generation, iPod touch 3rd generation, iPod touch 4th generation and iPad on the iTunes App Store. Itunes.apple.com. May 3, 2012. Archived from the original on August 15, 2012. Retrieved August 15, 2012.
 Goldfarb, Andrew November 25, 2013. Assassins Creed Pirates Release Date, Price Announced. IGN. Archived from the original on November 25, 2013. Retrieved November 26, 2013.
 Goldfarb, Andrew September 10, 2013. Assassins Creed Liberation HD, Pirates Announced. IGN. Archived from the original on September 13, 2013. Retrieved September 10, 2013.
 Futter, Mike September 10, 2013. Assassins Creed: Pirates Brings The High Seas To Small Devices. Game Informer. GameStop. Archived from the original on September 13, 2013. Retrieved September 10, 2013.
 Miller, Matt August 21, 2014. Assassins Creed Memories Launches On iOS. Game Informer. GameStop. Archived from the original on August 22, 2014. Retrieved August 22, 2014.
 Sinha, Robin October 1, 2014. Ubisoft Unveils Assassins Creed Identity for IPhone and IPad. NDTV Gadgets. NDTV Convergence Limited. Archived from the original on October 23, 2014. Retrieved October 16, 2014.
 Assassins Creed: Utopia geannuleerd. Gamer.nl. Archived from the original on October 6, 2014. Retrieved October 6, 2014.
 GREE: GREE and Ubisoft Team Up to Deliver New Assassins Creed Mobile Game. Archived from the original on October 6, 2014. Retrieved October 6, 2014.
 Eurogamer: Assassins Creed: Utopia wont link with AC3 beyond story. Eurogamer.net. June 21, 2012. Archived from the original on October 6, 2014. Retrieved October 6, 2014.
 Eurogamer: Assassins Creed Utopia is a citybuilding battler. Eurogamer.net. September 6, 2012. Archived from the original on October 6, 2014. Retrieved October 6, 2014.
 Bramwell, Tom October 14, 2009. Ubi: We could do 35 Assassins Creeds News  News . Eurogamer.net. Archived from the original on October 1, 2012. Retrieved August 15, 2012.
 Ivan, Tom June 11, 2012. News: Ubisoft hopes to reach Assassins Creed 10. ComputerAndVideoGames.com. Archived from the original on August 15, 2012. Retrieved August 15, 2012.
 AC:3 Possible Locations Named In Survey. CVG. November 29, 2011. Archived from the original on November 30, 2011. Retrieved November 30, 2011.
 Dutton, Fred April 4, 2012. Ubisoft: WW2, Japan and Egypt would make dismal Assassins Creed locations. Eurogamer.net. Archived from the original on July 9, 2012. Retrieved August 15, 2012.
 Makuch, Eddie. Indiaset Assassins Creed on Ubisofts radar. GameSpot. Archived from the original on October 20, 2012.
 Totilo, Stephen June 14, 2013. Ubisoft Has Three Assassins Creeds in Development, Vows Innovation. Archived from the original on June 17, 2013. Retrieved June 14, 2013.
 Tom Phillips August 5, 2013. There is an end to the Assassins Creed series, Ubisoft says. Eurogamer. Archived from the original on August 6, 2013. Retrieved August 5, 2013.
 Monica M. November 14, 2016. Netflix And Ubisoft In Talks To Make Assassins Creed, Watch Dogs, And Tom Clancy TV Series. Jobs n Hire. Archived from the original on May 10, 2017.
 Plunkett, Luke 7 May 2017. Assassins Creed Is Getting An Anime Series. Kotaku. Gizmodo Media Group. Retrieved 29 September 2018.
 Skrebels, Joe July 5, 2017. ASSASSINS CREED ANIME ANNOUNCED BY CASTLEVANIA NETFLIX PRODUCER. IGN. Archived from the original on July 5, 2017. Retrieved July 5, 2017.
 Osborn, Alex August 28, 2015. ASSASSINS CREED MOVIE FEATURES SHARED UNIVERSE WITH GAMES. IGN. Archived from the original on August 29, 2015. Retrieved August 28, 2015.
 Tom Phillips January 6, 2015. Assassins Creed film now due Christmas 2016. Eurogamer. Archived from the original on January 6, 2015. Retrieved January 6, 2015.
 Will Robinson December 20, 2016. Assassins Creed reviews: Michael Fassbenders movie panned. Ew.com. Archived from the original on May 10, 2017. Retrieved March 31, 2017.
 Graser, Marc October 20, 2011. Sony breeds Creed. Variety. Archived from the original on August 10, 2014. Retrieved August 10, 2014.
 Wigler, Josh July 9, 2012. Michael Fassbender To Star In Assassins Creed. MTV. Archived from the original on August 12, 2014. Retrieved August 10, 2014.
 Doty, Meriah August 27, 2015. Assassins Creed First Look: Heres Michael Fassbender as Brand New Character Exclusive. Yahoo. Archived from the original on September 2, 2015. Retrieved August 27, 2015.
 Graser, Marc October 22, 2012. New Regency, Fox partner on Ubisofts Assassins Creed. Variety. Archived from the original on August 12, 2014. Retrieved August 10, 2014.
 Siegel, Tatiana January 14, 2013. New Regency and Ubisoft Tap Brit Writer for Assassins Creed Film Exclusive. The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on November 23, 2014. Retrieved August 10, 2014.
 Vejvoda, Jim August 16, 2013. Scott Frank Rewriting Assassins Creed Movie. IGN. Archived from the original on August 19, 2013. Retrieved August 16, 2013.
 Fleming Jr., Mike April 7, 2014. Exodus Scribes Adam Cooper  Bill Collage Take Assassins Creed. Deadline.com. Archived from the original on April 10, 2014. Retrieved April 7, 2014.
 Fleming, Jr., Mike April 29, 2014. Michael Fassbender Poised To ReTeam With Macbeth Helmer On Assassins Creed. Deadline.com. Archived from the original on April 29, 2014. Retrieved April 29, 2014.
 Big screen adaptation of Assassins Creed starts shooting in Malta. timesofmalta.com. September 3, 2015. Archived from the original on September 5, 2015. Retrieved September 4, 2015.
 Lee, Chris December 9, 2015. Michael Fassbender was playing the hero in Assassins Creed when he nabbed a SAG Award nomination. Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on December 12, 2015. Retrieved December 10, 2015.
 Jayson, Jay January 15, 2016. Assassins Creed Movie Starring Michael Fassbender Wraps Filming. Comic Book. Archived from the original on March 31, 2017.
 Giovagnoli, Max 2011. Plan Transmedia. Transmedia Storytelling: Imagery, Shapes and Techniques. Lulu.com. p. 43. ISBN 9781105062582. Archived from the original on December 14, 2017.
 Manco, Emanuele 2012. Assassins Creed, cronologia del successso. In Guadalupi, Marco. Effemme 2 in Italian. Delos Digital srl. p. 132. ISBN 9788867750184. Archived from the original on December 14, 2017.
 McElroy, Griffin 27 October 2009. First Assassins Creed: Lineage episode is surprisingly great. Engadget. Oath Tech Network AOL Tech. Retrieved 9 September 2018.
 Fahey, Mike 19 October 2009. A Fresh Look At Assassins Creed: Lineage. Kotaku. Gizmodo Media Group. Retrieved 29 September 2018.
 Fahey, Mike 11 October 2010. What Is Assassins Creed Ascendance?. Kotaku. Gizmodo Media Group. Retrieved 29 September 2018.
 Dutton, Fred 12 November 2010. Assassins Creed: Ascendance explained. Eurogamer. Gamer Network. Retrieved 29 September 2018.
 Cuny, Julien 2010. Assassins Creed Ascendance Announcement. UbiWorkshop. Ubisoft Entertainment. Archived from the original on November 15, 2010. Retrieved September 29, 2018.
 Ubisoft preps animated Assassins Creed short. Gamespot.com. November 12, 2010. Archived from the original on November 15, 2010. Retrieved November 13, 2010.
 The French getting Assassins Creed comic. News.bigdownload.com. October 28, 2009. Archived from the original on May 26, 2010. Retrieved October 21, 2010.
 Assassins Creed : Desmond  Trailer de la bande dessine. YouTube. Archived from the original on February 22, 2013. Retrieved October 21, 2010.
 Ubisoft Says Yes Russian for New Assassins Creed Comic Book  Ripten Video Game Blog. Ripten.com. July 15, 2010. Archived from the original on May 8, 2018. Retrieved October 21, 2010.
 Tom Magrino July 15, 2010. Assassins Creed comics due this fall. gamespot.com. Retrieved July 15, 2010.
 Assassinss Creed: The Fall comic to be published by Wildstorm in November. News.bigdownload.com. August 17, 2010. Archived from the original on October 21, 2010. Retrieved October 21, 2010.
 Haas, Pete May 26, 2012. Assassins Creed: The Chain Will Prepare You For Assassins Creed 3. Archived from the original on March 17, 2015. Retrieved June 6, 2012.
 George, Richard July 19, 2013. New Assassins Creed Graphic Novel Debuts Indian Assassin. IGN. Archived from the original on July 22, 2013. Retrieved July 19, 2013.
 Moser, Cassidee August 31, 2015. Assassins Creed Comic Issue 1 Covers Revealed  IGN. Ca.ign.com. Archived from the original on December 26, 2015. Retrieved December 24, 2015.
 Tony GMan Guerrero on August 31, 2015 August 31, 2015. ASSASSINS CREED 1 Covers Revealed. Comic Vine. Retrieved December 24, 2015.
 Welcome to the N.H.K.s Oiwa Draws Assassins Creed 4 Manga. Anime News Network. July 9, 2013. Archived from the original on October 30, 2017. Retrieved November 19, 2017.
 Assassins Creed: The Secret Crusade. Archived from the original on October 20, 2012. Retrieved May 31, 2011.
 Assassins Creed: Revelations  Oliver Bowden  Penguin Books. Penguin.co.uk. November 24, 2011. Archived from the original on May 21, 2014. Retrieved August 15, 2012.
 Makuch, Eddie February 14, 2014. Now theres an Assassins Creed board game. GameSpot. Archived from the original on December 10, 2017. Retrieved December 10, 2017.
 Delgado, Jess February 16, 2014. Assassins Creed Arena, el nuevo juego de tablero de AC. Hobby Consolas in Spanish. Archived from the original on December 10, 2017. Retrieved December 10, 2017.
 Mastrangeli, Tony 17 September 2018. Assassins Creed: Brotherhood of Venice Coming to Kickstarter. Board Games Quest. Retrieved 29 October 2018.
 Vincent, Brittany 17 September 2018. New Assassins Creed Board Game Features New Story With Familiar Character Cameos. Variety. Penske Business Media, LLC. Retrieved 29 October 2018.
 Assassins Creed: Brotherhood of Venice is the next stealth board game from VCommandos creators. Table Top Gaming. Warners Group Publications Plc. 17 September 2018. Retrieved 29 October 2018.
 Hall, Charlie 17 September 2018. Assassins Creed board game coming to Kickstarter in November. Polygon. Retrieved 29 October 2018.
 Plunkett, Luke 17 September 2018. New Assassins Creed Board Game Has Miniatures, A Campaign And An Ezio Cameo. Kotaku. Gizmodo Media Group. Retrieved 29 October 2018.
 Artists for hire. Ubiworkshop.com. Archived from the original on August 22, 2010. Retrieved October 21, 2010.
 Your facestabbing art could be featured in Assassins Creed art book. GamesRadar. Archived from the original on January 17, 2014.
 Assassins Creed  Encyclopedia: Second Edition  UbiWorkshop. UbiWorkshop Store. Archived from the original on November 27, 2015. Retrieved October 6, 2014.
 Assassins Creed  EncyclopediaThird Edition. UbiWorkshop Store. Archived from the original on November 22, 2014.
 Assassins Creed: Directors Cut Edition Reviews. Metacritic. Archived from the original on August 24, 2011. Retrieved June 19, 2011.
 Assassins Creed Reviews. Metacritic. Archived from the original on June 5, 2011. Retrieved June 19, 2011.
 Assassins Creed Reviews. Metacritic. Archived from the original on June 11, 2011. Retrieved June 19, 2011.
 Assassins Creed: Altars Chronicles Reviews. Metacritic. Archived from the original on October 21, 2011. Retrieved June 19, 2011.
 Assassins Creed: Bloodlines Reviews. Metacritic. Archived from the original on April 11, 2012. Retrieved June 19, 2011.
 Assassins Creed II Reviews. Metacritic. Archived from the original on September 29, 2011. Retrieved June 19, 2011.
 Assassins Creed II Reviews. Metacritic. Archived from the original on February 11, 2011. Retrieved June 19, 2011.
 Assassins Creed II Reviews. Metacritic. Archived from the original on August 29, 2011. Retrieved June 19, 2011.
 Assassins Creed II: Discovery Reviews. Metacritic. Archived from the original on April 5, 2011. Retrieved June 19, 2011.
 Assassins Creed: Brotherhood Reviews. Metacritic. Archived from the original on August 30, 2011. Retrieved June 19, 2011.
 Assassins Creed: Brotherhood Reviews. Metacritic. Archived from the original on August 26, 2011. Retrieved June 19, 2011.
 Assassins Creed: Brotherhood Reviews. Metacritic. Archived from the original on August 28, 2011. Retrieved June 19, 2011.
 Assassins Creed: Revelations Reviews. Metacritic. Archived from the original on June 18, 2011. Retrieved June 19, 2011.
 Assassins Creed: Revelations Reviews. Metacritic. Archived from the original on July 30, 2012. Retrieved June 19, 2011.
 Assassins Creed: Revelations Reviews. Metacritic. Archived from the original on July 30, 2012. Retrieved June 19, 2011.
 Assassins Creed III Reviews. Metacritic. Archived from the original on June 20, 2012. Retrieved June 19, 2011.
 Assassins Creed III Reviews. Metacritic. Archived from the original on May 16, 2012. Retrieved June 19, 2011.
 Assassins Creed III Reviews. Metacritic. Archived from the original on June 20, 2012. Retrieved June 19, 2011.
 Assassins Creed III Reviews. Metacritic. Archived from the original on March 19, 2012. Retrieved June 19, 2011.
 Assassins Creed Liberation HD Reviews. Metacritic. Archived from the original on April 7, 2014. Retrieved April 27, 2014.
 Assassins Creed Liberation HD Reviews. Metacritic. Archived from the original on March 28, 2014. Retrieved April 27, 2014.
 Assassins Creed III: Liberation Reviews. Metacritic. Archived from the original on December 26, 2017. Retrieved April 17, 2015.
 Assassins Creed Liberation HD Reviews. Metacritic. Archived from the original on June 1, 2014. Retrieved April 27, 2014.
 Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag Reviews. Metacritic. Archived from the original on December 4, 2013. Retrieved October 30, 2013.
 Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag Reviews. Metacritic. Archived from the original on November 2, 2013. Retrieved October 30, 2013.
 Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag Reviews. Metacritic. Archived from the original on June 25, 2013. Retrieved October 30, 2013.
 Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag Reviews. Metacritic. Archived from the original on October 24, 2013. Retrieved October 30, 2013.
 Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag Reviews. Metacritic. Archived from the original on October 29, 2013. Retrieved October 30, 2013.
 Assassins Creed Rogue Reviews. Metacritic. Archived from the original on November 16, 2014. Retrieved November 11, 2014.
 Assassins Creed Rogue Reviews. Metacritic. Archived from the original on November 19, 2014. Retrieved November 11, 2014.
 Assassins Creed Rogue Reviews. Metacritic. Archived from the original on November 15, 2014. Retrieved November 11, 2014.
 Assassins Creed Identity Reviews. Metacritic. Archived from the original on May 7, 2017. Retrieved May 25, 2017.
 Assassins Creed Unity Reviews. Metacritic. Archived from the original on November 15, 2014. Retrieved November 12, 2014.
 Assassins Creed Unity Reviews. Metacritic. Archived from the original on November 12, 2014. Retrieved November 12, 2014.
 Assassins Creed Unity Reviews. Metacritic. Archived from the original on November 14, 2014. Retrieved November 12, 2014.
 Assassins Creed Chronicles: China aggregated review score PC. Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on November 10, 2015. Retrieved December 18, 2015.
 Assassins Creed Chronicles: China aggregated review score PS4. Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on November 13, 2015. Retrieved December 18, 2015.
 Assassins Creed Chronicles: China aggregated review score Xbox One. Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on October 7, 2015. Retrieved December 18, 2015.
 Assassins Creed Syndicate Reviews. Metacritic. Archived from the original on May 28, 2017. Retrieved May 25, 2017.
 Assassins Creed Syndicate Reviews. Metacritic. Archived from the original on December 9, 2015. Retrieved January 13, 2016.
 Assassins Creed Syndicate Reviews. Metacritic. Archived from the original on November 17, 2015. Retrieved November 14, 2015.
 Assassins Creed Chronicles: India aggregated review score PC. Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on December 25, 2015. Retrieved July 22, 2018.
 Assassins Creed Chronicles: India aggregated review score PS4. Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on January 3, 2016. Retrieved January 12, 2016.
 Assassins Creed Chronicles: China aggregated review score Xbox One. Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on December 4, 2015. Retrieved January 12, 2016.
 Assassins Creed Chronicles: Russia aggregated review score PS4. Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on January 21, 2016. Retrieved January 12, 2016.
 Assassins Creed Chronicles: Russia aggregated review score Xbox One. Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on January 27, 2016. Retrieved January 12, 2016.
 Assassins Creed Origins for PC Reviews. Metacritic. Archived from the original on October 29, 2017. Retrieved October 26, 2017.
 Assassins Creed Origins for PlayStation 4 Reviews. Metacritic. Archived from the original on November 1, 2017. Retrieved October 26, 2017.
 Assassins Creed Origins for Xbox One Reviews. Metacritic. Archived from the original on November 2, 2017. Retrieved October 26, 2017.
 Assassins Creed Odyssey for PC Reviews. Metacritic. Retrieved October 1, 2018.
 Assassins Creed Odyssey for PlayStation 4 Reviews. Metacritic. Retrieved October 1, 2018.
 Assassins Creed Odyssey for Xbox One Reviews. Metacritic. Retrieved October 1, 2018.
 Assassins creed 3 Review. Blast. Archived from the original on November 13, 2012. Retrieved November 11, 2012.
 Tassi, Paul. Assassins Creed Needs To Slow Down And Refocus, Or Risk Total Derailment. Forbes. Retrieved 29 May 2018.
 Tassi, Paul. Assassins Creed Isnt, And Can Never Be Call of Duty. Forbes. Retrieved 29 May 2018.
 Hillier, Brenna. Ubisoft has lost control of Assassins Creed. VG247. Retrieved 29 May 2018.
 Ortiz, Evan. THE EVOLUTION OF ASSASSINS CREED. Cubed Gamers. Retrieved 29 May 2018.
 Reparaz, Mikel September 13, 2016. ASSASSINS CREED THE EZIO COLLECTION ANNOUNCED FOR PS4, XBOX ONE. Ubisoft Blog. Archived from the original on March 23, 2017. Retrieved March 22, 2017.
 Phillips, Tom June 2, 2014. Assassins Creed 4 character crosses over to Watch Dogs. Eurogamer. Archived from the original on August 28, 2016. Retrieved August 26, 2016.
 Totilo, Stephen. More Evidence That Assassins Creed And Watch Dogs Are Set In The Same Universe. kotaku.com. Archived from the original on January 24, 2018. Retrieved May 8, 2018.
 Rositano, Joseph September 22, 2009. Academy of Champions Soccer Review. PALGN. Archived from the original on January 16, 2014.
 Plunkett, Luke October 21, 2011. Yup, Ezio is in Soulcalibur V. Kotaku. Archived from the original on October 21, 2011.
 Assassins Creed II Costume  LittleBigPlanet. Littlebigplanet.com. Archived from the original on August 31, 2012. Retrieved August 15, 2012.
 Uplay  Prince of Persia: The Forgotten Sands. Archived from the original on December 3, 2012. Retrieved September 21, 2012.
 Marshall Honorof. The Escapist : News : Assassins Creeds Ezio Joins the Party in Final Fantasy XIII2. Escapistmagazine.com. Archived from the original on May 22, 2013. Retrieved August 15, 2012.
 Assassins Creed Brotherhood Gets Raiden. playstationlifestyle.net. November 3, 2010. Archived from the original on December 24, 2017. Retrieved May 8, 2018.
 Peace Walker gets Assassins Creed, Monster Hunter tieins. GameSpot. Archived from the original on December 22, 2017. Retrieved November 25, 2016.
 Final Fantasy XV  Assassins Festival. Final Fantasy XV. Archived from the original on August 25, 2017. Retrieved August 24, 2017.
 Kamath, Sudhish November 6, 2011. Tale of three superheroes. The Hindu. Archived from the original on August 18, 2013. Retrieved December 5, 2011.
 Ranjitha, G. September 19, 2011. Poster rip offs. The Times of India. Archived from the original on May 17, 2017. Retrieved November 4, 2012.
External links
Wikiquote has quotations related to: Assassins Creed video game series
Wikiquote has quotations related to: Last words in Assassins Creed series games
Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Assassins Creed Tour.
Official website
The Assassins Creed Wiki
vte
Assassins Creed
Video games
Main series
Assassins Creed II Brotherhood Revelations III IV: Black Flag Rogue Unity Syndicate Origins Odyssey
Other games
Altars Chronicles Bloodlines II: Discovery III: Liberation Identity Chronicles
Adaptations
Novels Lineage The Fall The Chain Brahman Trial by Fire Embers Film
Characters
Desmond Miles Altar IbnLaAhad Ezio Auditore da Firenze
Related
Prince of Persia Watch Dogs Skull  Bones Soulcalibur V
Category Category
vte
Ubisoft
Franchises
Anno Assassins Creed Brothers in Arms Call of Juarez The Crew The Crew 2 CSI Driver Far Cry Imagine Just Dance Might and Magic Myst Petz Prince of Persia Rayman Raving Rabbids Red Steel The Settlers Silent Hunter Tom Clancys Ghost Recon Rainbow Six Splinter Cell Watch Dogs List of Ubisoft games
Subsidiaries
Blue Byte Ivory Tower Ketchapp Leamington Massive Entertainment Montpellier Montreal Motion Pictures Nadeo Quazal Quebec RedLynx Red Storm Entertainment Reflections Singapore Toronto List of Ubisoft subsidiaries
Technology
AnvilNext Jade LyN Snowdrop UbiArt Framework Uplay
Categories: Assassins Creed2012 in fictionActionadventure gamesAlternate history video gamesAncient astronauts in fictionApocalyptic video gamesArtificial intelligence in fictionHistorical fictionOpen world video gamesPanhistorical video gamesParkour video gamesScience fiction video gamesStealth video gamesVideo game franchises introduced in 2007Virtual reality in fictionFiction about assassinationsVideo games with historical settingsMedia franchisesVideo games adapted into comicsVideo games adapted into novelsVideo games adapted into films

Assassins Creed video game
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
Assassins Creed
Assassins Creed.jpg
DevelopersUbisoft Montreal
PublishersUbisoft
DirectorsPatrice Dsilets
ProducersJade Raymond
DesignersMaxime Bland
ProgrammersMathieu Mazerolle
ArtistsRaphal Lacoste
WritersCorey May
ComposersJesper Kyd
SeriesAssassins Creed
EngineScimitar
Platforms
PlayStation 3
Xbox 360
Microsoft Windows
Release
November 13, 2007show
GenresActionadventure, stealth
ModesSingleplayer
Assassins Creed is an actionadventure video game developed by Ubisoft Montreal and published by Ubisoft. It is the first installment in the Assassins Creed series. The game was released for PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 in November 2007 and was made available on Microsoft Windows in April 2008. Also, the game can be played on Xbox One consoles via backward compatibility.5

The plot is set in a fictional history of realworld events and follows the centuriesold struggle between the Assassins, who fight for peace with free will, and the Templars, who desire peace through control. The game primarily takes place during the Third Crusade in the Holy Land in 1191, with the plot revolving around the Secret Order of Assassins, based upon the Hashshashin sect. The player is, in reality, playing as a modernday man named Desmond Miles, who, through the use of a machine named the Animus, is allowed the viewing and controlling of the protagonists genetic memories of his ancestors, in this case, Altar IbnLaAhad, a member of the Assassins. Through this plot device, details emerge of a struggle between two factions: the Knights Templar and the Assassins, over an artifact known as the Apple of Eden, an ancient artifact used to control minds.

The game received generally positive reviews, with critics praising its storytelling, visuals, art design, and originality, although the game was also criticized for the repetitive nature of its gameplay. Assassins Creed won several awards at E3 in 2006, as well as several endyear awards after its release. The game spawned a sequel, Assassins Creed II, which was released in November 2009. Since the release and success of Assassins Creed II, subsequent games have been released, with various other Assassins and time periods.


Contents
1Gameplay
2Story
2.1Plot
3Development
3.1Conception
3.2Programming
3.3Voice acting
3.4Release
4Music
5Reception
5.1Accolades
5.2Sales
6Sequels
7References
8External links
Gameplay
Assassins Creed is an actionadventure game6 set in an open world environment7 and played from a thirdperson perspective in which the player primarily assumes the role of Altar, as experienced by protagonist Desmond Miles. The primary goal of the game is to carry out a series of assassinations ordered by Al Mualim, the leader of the Assassins. To achieve this goal, the player must travel from the Brotherhoods headquarters in Masyaf, across the terrain of the Holy Land known as the Kingdom to one of three citiesJerusalem, Acre, or Damascusto find the Brotherhood agent in that city. There, the agent, in addition to providing a safe house, gives the player minimal knowledge about the target and requires them to perform additional reconnaissance missions before attempting the assassination. These missions include eavesdropping, interrogation, pickpocketing, and completing tasks for informers and fellow Assassins. Additionally, the player may take part in any number of side objectives, including climbing tall towers to map out the city and saving citizens who are being threatened or harassed by the city guards. There are also various additional memories that do not advance the plot, such as hunting down and killing Templars and flag collecting. After completing each assassination, the player is returned to the Brotherhood and rewarded with a better weapon andor upgrade before going after the next target or given another set of targets, with the player free to select the order of certain targets.

The player is made aware of how noticeable Altar is to enemy guards as well as the current state of alert in the local area via the Social Status Icon. To perform many of the assassinations and other tasks, the player must consider the use of actions distinguished by its type of profile. Lowprofile actions allow Altar to blend into nearby crowds, pass by other citizens, or perform other nonthreatening tasks that can be used to hide and reduce the alertness level; the player can also use Altars retractable hidden blade to attempt lowprofile assassinations. Highprofile actions are more noticeable, and include running, scaling the sides of buildings to climb to higher vantage points, and attacking foes; performing these actions at certain times may raise the local areas awareness level. Once the area is at high alert, crowds run and scatter while guards attempt to chase and bring down Altar; to reduce the alert level, the player must control Altar as to break the guards line of sight and then find a hiding space, such as a haystack or rooftop garden, or blend in with the citizens sitting on benches or wandering scholars. Should the player be unable to escape the guards, they can fight back using swordplay maneuvers.

The players health is described as the level of Synchronization between Desmond and Altars memories; should Altar suffer injury, it is represented as deviation from the actual events of the memory, rather than physical damage. If all synchronization is lost, the current memory that Desmond is experiencing will be restarted at the last checkpoint. When the synchronization bar is full, the player has the additional option to use Eagle Vision, which allows the computerrendered memory to highlight all visible characters in colors corresponding to whether they are allies blue, foes red, neutral white, or even the target of their assassination gold. Due to Altars memories being rendered by the computer of the Animus project, the player may experience glitches in the rendering of the historical world, which may help the player to identify targets, or can be used to alter the viewpoint during ingame scripted scenes should the player react fast enough when they appear.

Story
Plot
See also: List of Assassins Creed characters
In 2012, bartender Desmond Miles is kidnapped by agents of Abstergo Industries, the worlds largest pharmaceutical conglomerate. Under the guidance of Dr. Warren Vidic and his assistant Lucy Stillman, Desmond is forced to participate in a series of trials revolving around the Animus, a machine capable of translating the genetic memories of his ancestors into a simulated reality. Vidic instructs him to relive the early years of Altar IbnLaAhad, a senior member of the Assassin Brotherhood during the time of the Third Crusade. His investigation reveals that Altar, blinded by arrogance, botched an attempt by the Assassins to retrieve an artifact, the Piece of Eden, from the forces of Robert de Sabl, Grand Master of the Knights Templar, leading to the death of one Assassin, and severely wounding another in the process. Though Altar manages to partially redeem himself by fighting off a Crusader attack on the Assassin home base of Masyaf, his mentor and superior, Al Mualim, orders him to assassinate nine individuals in order to regain his honour:

Tamir, an arms merchant selling weapons to both sides.
Garnier de Nablus, a prominent Crusader conducting alchemical experiments on the sick.
Talal, the leader of a gang of slavers.
Abul Nuquod, a pompous trader stealing money meant to fund the war.
William V, Marquess of Montferrat, the cruel and abusive regent of Acre.
Majd Addin based off Baha adDin ibn Shaddad, a tyrant who rules Jerusalem through fear.
Master Sibrand, a paranoid knight planning to betray the Crusaders.
Jubair al Hakim, a scholar using his position to seize and destroy all written knowledge.
Robert de Sabl, the grandmaster of the Templars, the ancient enemies of the Brotherhood.
As Altar eliminates each target, he learns that all nine are secretly members of the Templar Order and that they were conspiring to locate an Apple of Eden, a relic of a longforgotten civilization said to possess godlike powers. During an initial attempt to assassinate Robert at a funeral in Jerusalem, Altar discovers that Maria, a young Templar agent, had disguised herself as him in order to buy enough time for Robert to negotiate an alliance between the Crusaders and Saracens against the Assassins. Sparing her life, Altar catches up to Robert in the camp of King Richard I and exposes his crimes. Unsure of whom to believe, Richard suggests a oneonone duel to decide the truth, remarking that God will decide the victor. Upon sustaining a mortal wound from Altar, Robert confesses that he did not act alone, Al Mualim had also sought the Apple and betrayed the Templars in the process. Returning to Masyaf, Altar finds both the inhabitants and Assassins under the control of the artifact, which is now held by Al Mualim. With the help of several Assassins brought in for backup, Altar storms the citadel and confronts his mentor in the gardens. Using the Apple, Al Mualim battles his apprentice with illusions before resorting to single combat. Altair stabs him with his hidden blade and tries to destroy the Apple, but instead unlocks a secret map within that reveals the location of countless other Pieces of Eden around the world.

With the trials complete, Vidic reveals that Abstergo is but the modern incarnation of the Templars. Lucy, who turns out to be a mole planted by the modernday Assassins, mysteriously disappears. While awaiting her return, Desmond discovers strange drawings covering the walls of his room, which foretell a catastrophic event that will wipe out humanity.

Development
Conception
After completing Prince of Persia: The Sands of Time near the end of 2003, Patrice Dsilets was instructed to begin work on the next Prince of Persia game, with plans for it to release on the seventhgeneration consoles. However, at that time, neither Microsoft nor Sony had revealed what their next consoles would be. The initial development of the game from January 2004 was aimed as a PlayStation 2 title, following the same linear approach that The Sands of Time had taken.8 However, as more information came in about the capabilities of the nextgeneration consoles by September 2004, Dsilets team considered expanding the Prince of Persia acrobatic gameplay into an open world which would be feasible on the newer systems.89

Dsilets wanted to move away from the lead character being a prince simply waiting for his reign to start, but a character that wanted to strive to be a king. He came upon one of his university books related to secret societies, and its first material related to the Assassins, and recognized that he could have the lead character in the game being the secondhighest Assassin, seeking to being the leader of the group.9 As such, the game began work under the title Prince of Persia: Assassin, inspired by the life of Hassani Sabbah and making heavy use of Bartols novel Alamut.9101112 The assassin character was fleshed out over the course of the games threeyear development in an iterative fashion. The team had some idea of how the character dressed from Alamut and other historical works, in all whiterobes and red belt, but had to envision how to detail this in the game. One of the first concept sketches, drawn by animator Khai Nguyen suggested the concept of a bird of prey, which resonated with the team. The assassin was named Altair, meaning bird of prey in Arabic, and eagle imagery was used heavily in connection to the Assassins.9 The team did take some creative routes to meet narrative goals and avoid technical limitations of the consoles. Altair was to be a heroic character with a bit of a badass edge, and the artist borrowed elements of the G.I. Joe character Storm Shadow, a similarlyskilled hero. Rendering long flowing robes was impossible to do on the newer hardware, so they shorted the robe and gave it a more feathered look, resonating the bird of prey imagery.9 Similar routes were taken with other parts of the gameplay as to take liberties with accuracy as to make the game fun to play. The team wanted Altairs parkour moves to look believable, but sacrificed realism for gameplay value, allowing the player to make maneuvers otherwise seemingly impossible in reallife. Having leaps of faiths from high vantage points into haypiles and using haypiles to hide from guards was a similar concept which borrowed from Hollywood films, but Dsilets observed that Alamut described similar actions that the Assassins had undertook.9

To drive the story, the team had to come up with some goal that both the Assassins and Templars were searching for. Philippe Morin had suggested using the apple of Eden, which the team initially thought to be a humorous aspect for everyone fighting over an apple. However, as they researched into the game more, the team found that many medieval paintings of royalty and other leaders holding spherical objects similar to globus cruciger that represented power and control, and recognized that an artifact named the Apple of Eden would fit well into this concept.9

Among this work was the idea of the Animus, which came about after the teams decision to focus on the Assassins. The team considered that the player would travel through several different cities, and potentially recount numerous assassinations over the past thousand years, including some fantastical ones such as John F. Kennedy which would require some element of time travelling. Dsilets had seen a program on DNA and human history and was inspired by the idea if DNA could store human memories, then they could have an ingame machine that could be used for time and location jumps as well as explaining other aspects of the games user interface to the player. Dsilets considered this similar to what they had established in The Sands of Time. There, the game effectively is a story told by the Prince, and while in the game, should the playercharacter die, this is treated as a mistelling of the Princes story, allowing the player to back up and retry a segment of the game.9 Ubisofts marketing was not keen on the Animus idea, believing players would be confused and be disappointed that the game was not a true medieval experience. The games first trailer show at Electronic Entertainment Expo E3 2006 focused heavily on the medieval elements due to this.9 Later marketing materials closer to the games release hinted more directly at the science fiction elements of the game.13

Programming
Initial work on the game was to expand out various systems from Prince of Persia to the open world concept with a team of 20 at Ubisoft Montreal.12 A new nextgeneration game engine, the Scimitar engine, was created to support the open world, though this would take about two years to complete during which the team used the Sands of Time engine for development; Scimitar eventually was renamed to AnvilNext and has been used for most of the following Assissins Creed games and other titles at Ubisoft.12 Elements like wallclimbing were made more fluid, and the team worked to smooth other animation sequences; much of the improvements here came from programmer Richard Dumas and animator Alex Drouin, both whom had worked together on the same elements in Sands of Time.9 Level designers and artists recreating historical structures had to work together as to make sure nearly every building could be climbable while still holding the games historical appearances.14 This also helped them to give the feeling to the player that they had as much freedom as possible within the game, a concept that had originated from the success of the Grand Theft Auto series.149

In contrast to Prince of Persia, where the general path that the player takes through a level is predefined, the open world approach of this game required them to create cities that felt realistic and accurate to historical information but which the player had full freedom to climb and explore. Outside of special buildings, they crafted their cities like Lego bricks, with a second pass to smooth out the shapes of the cities to help with pathfinding and other facets of the enemy artificial intelligence.9 To encourage the player to explore, they included the various towers that help to reveal parts of the map. Historical, theses cities had such landmark towers, and inspired by those, the developers incorporated them into the map, making these points of interest and challenges for players to drive them to climb them.9 Another factor was guiding the player and devising missions for the player that still gave the player freedom for how to approach it but still creating specific moments they wanted the player to experience. For these cases, they used simple animations developed in Adobe Flash to layout the fundamentals of what actions they wanted, and then crafted levels and missions around those.9

As they started to recognize the need for cities in this open world game, Dsilets wanted to make sure they were also able to simulate large crowds, as this had been a limiting factor due to hardware limitations during the development of The Sands of Time; with the PlayStation 2 hardware, they could only support having up to eight characters on screen for The Sands of Time, but the nextgeneration hardware was able to support up to 120 people.14 Having crowds in the game also led to the concept of social stealth, where the main character could mask themselves in the open, in addition to staying out of sight on rooftops.9 Dsilets had come from an acting background, and one element he had incorporated into the game was to make the playercharacter feel more like they were controlling parts of a puppet so that the character would appear more human. This led to the use of high and lowprofile action in gameplay that served in part as expressing the characters emotions, as well as allowing the player to continue to control the character during the games cutscenes.13

The fundamentals of gameplay were completed within nine to twelve months, and another year was spent improving it before they presented the game to Ubisofts executives in Paris.9 Jade Raymond was brought in in late 2004 to serve as the games producer, helping with the teams growth and the games direction.915 Around late 2005 to early 2006, following nearly two years of development, the concept for Prince of Persia: Assassin had the games titular prince was AIcontrolled, watched over by the playercontrolled Assassin that served as the Princes bodyguard and rescued the Prince from various situations.8 Ubisofts management and the development had debates on this direction; Ubisofts management wanted another game in the Prince of Persia franchise, and was not keen on releasing a game with that name where the Prince was not the lead character. The development team counters that with a new generation of consoles, they could potentially make it a new intellectual property.129 Near the 2016 Game Developers Conference, Ubisofts marketing team came up with the idea of naming the game Assassins Creed, which Dsilets recognized fit in perfectly with the themes they had been working on, including tying into the creed of the Assassins, nothing is true; everything is permitted.9 The prince character was dropped and the game focused solely on the assassin as the playable character.912

Following the E3 2006 presentation and the name change to Assassins Creed, the Ubisoft Montreal team grew to support the last year of the games development, with up to 150 persons by the end of the process.12 Added team members included those that had just finished up production on Prince of Persia: The Two Thrones, as well as former staff that had recently been let go from Gameloft another publisher owned by Ubisofts cofounder Michel Guillemot.9 The Scimitar engine was completed, allowing the team to transfer their work and improve detail and art assets.9

Voice acting
On September 28, 2006, in an interview with IGN, producer Jade Raymond confirmed that Altar is a medieval hitman with a mysterious past and that he is not a time traveller.16 In a later interview on December 13, 2006, with IGN, Kristen Bell, who lent her voice and likeness to the game, talked about the plot. According to the interview, the plot centers on genetic memory and a corporation looking for descendants of an assassin.17

Its actually really interesting to me. Its sort of based on the research thats sort of happening now, about the fact that your genes might be able to hold memory. And you could argue semantics and say its instinct, but how does a baby bird know to eat a worm, as opposed to a cockroach, if its parents dont show it? And its about this science company trying to, Matrixstyle, go into peoples brains and find out an ancestor who used to be an assassin, and sort of locate who that person is.

Kristen Bell
On October 22, 2007, in an IGN Australia interview with Patrice Desilets mentioned that the lead characters climbing and running were done by Alex and Richard  the same guys from Prince of Persia.18

Altar is voiced by actor Philip Shahbaz,19 and his face is modelled on Francisco Randez, a model from Montral.2021 Al Mualims character is roughly based on Rashid adDin Sinan, who was the leader of the Syrian branch of the Hashshashin in 1191 and was nicknamed The Old Man of the Mountain. Al Mualim was referred to as Sinan in Assassins Creed: Altars Chronicles.

Release
The game was released for PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 on November 13, 2007, in North America, November 16 in Europe, and November 21 in Australia and New Zealand.2223

It was made public in April 2008 that Assassins Creed would be sold digitally and available for preorder through Valves software distribution Steam. The PC version of Assassins Creed was released on April 8, 2008, in North America. Four bonus mission types, not seen in the console versions, are included. These four missions are archer assassination, rooftop race challenge, merchant stand destruction challenge, and escort challenge. Because of these four exclusive missions only available on the PC, it was released and is sold under the name of Directors Cut Edition.24

A pirated version of the game has been in existence since late February 2008. According to Ubisoft, a computer bug was purposely inserted into the prerelease version of the game by the publisher itself to unpredictably crash the game and prevent completion as a security measure, though players were able to use extra content available on the Internet to bypass it.2526 The pirated version of Assassins Creed was one of the most popular titles for piracy during the first week of March 2008.27 The presence of the bug and performance of the pirated version of the game was believed by Ubisoft to lead to irreparable harm for the game and resulted in low retail sales; NPD Group reports that 40,000 copies of the PC title were sold in the United States in July, while more than 700,000 copies were illegally downloaded according to Ubisoft.2528 In July 2008, Ubisoft sued disc manufacturer Optical Experts Manufacturing, believing the company to be the source of the leak, citing poor security procedures that allowed an employee to leave with a copy of the game.2528

A digital rights managementfree version of the game was later made by GOG.com, a digital distribution store and subsidiary of CD Projekt and CD Projekt Red. It is available on the GOG Store and GOG Galaxy.

On July 10, 2007, during Microsofts E3 press conference, a demo was shown taking place in Jerusalem. Features that were demonstrated included improved crowd mechanics, the chase system chasing after a target trying to flee, as well as deeper aspects of parkour. This was the first time when Altar could be heard speaking. It was again showcased for 20 minutes on July 11, 2007. A video showed an extended version of the E3 demo and included Altar trying to escape after his assassination of Talal the Slave Trader.

Music
Jade Raymond, producer of Assassins Creed said: For Assassins Creed we wanted the score to capture the gruesome atmosphere of medieval warfare but also be edgy and contemporary.29 The musical score was composed by Jesper Kyd in 2007. Six tracks were made available online to those who have purchased the game; a password was given to people to insert at the soundtrack section of the Ubisoft website.30 Several tracks are also available to listen to on Kyds MySpace and his official website. The released tracks as a whole have the archaic Latin chorus and dark orchestral music, while the track Meditation Begins features a kind of Saltarello with a very ominous, dark, ambient overtone with men whispering in Latin. The atmosphere in these tracks is what Jesper Kyd is known for and is effective in situ.31 The soundtrack is available from various online music stores.

Assassins Creed Soundtrack
While the song The Chosen Assassins Creed by Intwine featuring Brainpower was made contributing to the game, it was not featured in the game nor its soundtrack. Other songs that were used in previews and trailers such as Teardrop by Massive Attack and Lonely Soul by UNKLE also are not present on the soundtrack.

Reception
Reception
Aggregate score
AggregatorScore
MetacriticPS3 8110032
X360 8110033
PC 7910034
Review scores
PublicationScore
1UP.com710
Eurogamer710
Famitsu3740
Game Informer9.510
GameSpot910
GamesRadar55 stars
GamesTM45 stars
IGN7.51035
OXM US8.510
PSM55 stars
Assassins Creed received generally favorable reviews from critics, according to review aggregator Metacritic.

Several publications such as Eurogamer, while still awarding the game decent scores, pointed out a number of significant shortcomings. Eurogamer stated that the gameplay never evolves and ultimately becomes a bit boring, and quite amazingly repetitive.36 In Andrew P.s review for EGM Kage, he wrote that the game features a challenging parkour path of escape...37 Famitsu awarded the Xbox 360 version of Assassins Creed a 36 9, 9, 9, 9, while the PS3 version received a 37 10, 8, 9, 10 out of 40, positively citing the story, presentation, and acrobatics, while criticizing the one button combat, map layout, and camera problems.3839 Game Informer awarded Assassins Creed a 9.5 out of 10, praising the control scheme, replay value, and intriguing story, but expressing frustration over the repetitive information gathering missions.40 On The Hotlist on ESPNEWS, ESPNs Aaron Boulding called the games concept of social stealth fairly original and added, Visually, the developers nailed it.41 GameTrailers similarly praised the story giving a 9.7 score to its story, and also cited repetitive gameplay and moronic AI as somewhat stifling its potential. Assassins Creed is one of those games that breaks new ground yet fails in nailing some fundamentals, said Gametrailers.42 The game also received a 10 out of 10 from GamesRadar.3233 According to GamePro, Assassins Creed is one of the finest gaming experiences ever created if you are willing to be patient due to the lack of fastpaced action.43 Hypers Darren Wells commends the game for its great story, great graphics and intuitive controls. However, he criticised it for some missions that dont feel right on the PC and its loopy menu system.44 Hilary Goldstein of IGN gave the game a 710, but was rather unimpressed compared to other critics, stating that a bad story, repetitive gameplay elements, and poor AI lead to the downfall of one of the more promising games in recent memory. He does give compliments to the combat animations and the climbing mechanic, and admired how accurately Ubisoft depicted the major cities of Jerusalem, Acre, and Damascus to their reallife counterparts.45

Accolades
Assassins Creed won several awards at E3 2006. Game Critics awarded it Best ActionAdventure Game,;46 from IGN, Best Action Game, PS3 Game of the Show, Best PS3 Action Game, Best PS3 Graphics; from GameSpot and GameSpy, Best PS3 Game of the Show; from GameTrailers Best of Show, and from 1UP.com, Best PS3 game. Creed was nominated for several other awards by XPlay47 and Spike TV.48 Assassins Creed was listed by Game Informer at 143 in their list of the top 200 games of all time. It also received the editors choice award from GameSpot.citation needed In December 2015, Game Informer ranked the game as the third best game in the Assassins Creed series to date.49

Sales
Sales for Assassins Creed greatly outstripped the expectations of the publisher.50

In the UK, Assassins Creed debuted at number one, knocking Infinity Wards Call of Duty 4: Modern Warfare from the top; the majority of the debut sales were on the Xbox 360, which claimed 67 of the games total sales.51 The Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 releases of Assassins Creed each received a Platinum sales award from the Entertainment and Leisure Software Publishers Association ELSPA,52 indicating sales of at least 300,000 copies per version in the United Kingdom.53 On April 16, 2009, Ubisoft revealed that the game had sold 8 million copies.54

Sequels
Main article: Assassins Creed
A prequel for the game, titled Assassins Creed: Altars Chronicles, developed by Gameloft,55 was released on February 5, 2008, for the Nintendo DS.56 A port of Assassins Creed: Altars Chronicles has also been released for the iPhone and the iPod Touch and Java ME on April 23, 2009, as well as for the Palm Pre.57

Assassins Creed II was released in the United States and Canada on November 17, 2009, and in Europe on November 20, 2009.58

References
 Assassins Creed Directors Cut Edition. IGN. Retrieved January 9, 2012.
 Assassins Creed. EB Games Australia. Archived from the original on April 8, 2008. Retrieved April 4, 2008.
 Assassins Creed. EB Games New Zealand. Archived from the original on April 11, 2008. Retrieved April 4, 2008.
 Assassins Creed. GAME. Archived from the original on March 12, 2008. Retrieved April 4, 2008.
 Assassins Creed joins Xbox One backward compatibility list. Polygon. Retrieved 20180702.
 Luis, Vanessa August 29, 2016. Why Assassins Creed is One of the Best ActionAdventure Games of All Time. Tata CLiQ. Retrieved January 28, 2018.
 GamesRadar Staff January 3, 2018. The 10 best openworld games of all time. GamesRadar. Retrieved January 28, 2018.
 Dyer, Mitch February 3, 2014. House Of Dreams: The Ubisoft Montreal Story. IGN. Retrieved October 4, 2018.
 Moss, Richard October 3, 2018. Assassins Creed: An oral history. Polygon. Retrieved October 3, 2018.
 CVG Staff November 7, 2006. Interview: Assassins creed. Computer and Video Games. Archived from the original on October 14, 2007. Retrieved November 3, 2008.
 Nick Doerr. Assassins Creed producer speaks out, we listen intently update 1. Retrieved November 3, 2008.
 Edge staff March 24, 2013. The Making of Assassins Creed. Edge. p. 1. Archived from the original on March 27, 2013. Retrieved March 24, 2013.
 Edge staff March 24, 2013. The Making of Assassins Creed. Edge. p. 3. Archived from the original on 20130530. Retrieved March 24, 2013.
 Edge staff March 24, 2013. The Making of Assassins Creed. Edge. p. 2. Archived from the original on March 27, 2013. Retrieved March 24, 2013.
 1
 IGN: Assassins Creed Preview. IGN. Retrieved October 6, 2014.
 IGN: IGN Exclusive Interview: Kristen Bell. IGN. December 13, 2006. Retrieved October 6, 2014.
 IGN: Assassins Creed AU Interview: Patrice Desilets. IGN. October 22, 2007. Retrieved October 6, 2014.
 Philip Shahbaz
 in French Assassins Creed Francisco Randez prte son visage  Altar lienmultimedia.com. Retrieved April 15, 2008.
 Francisco Randez. modelresource. Archived from the original on April 30, 2009. Retrieved September 15, 2009.
 GameSpot Staff October 29, 2007. Assassins Creed golden. GameSpot. Retrieved May 7, 2018.
 Chiappini, Dan November 13, 2007. Assassins Creed delayed in Australia and New Zealand. GameSpot. Retrieved May 7, 2018.
 Assassins Creed PC: New Investigation Types  News. Spong. March 4, 2008. Retrieved October 6, 2014.
 Sinclair, Brendan March 6, 2008. Ubisoft sues over Assassins Creed leak. GameSpot. Retrieved August 7, 2008.
 Rossignol, Jim March 4, 2008. So... Assassins Creed PC?. Rock, Paper, Shotgun. Archived from the original on March 7, 2008. Retrieved March 6, 2008.
 Gillen, Kieron March 5, 2008. The Yarrts: Piracy Snapshot 5.3.2008. Rock, Paper, Shotgun. Retrieved March 6, 2008.
 Jenkins, David August 7, 2008. Ubisoft Files 10M Suit Over Assassins Creed PC Leak. Gamasutra. Archived from the original on August 16, 2008. Retrieved August 7, 2008.
 McWhertor, Michael October 16, 2007. Assassins Creed Score Is BAFTAstic. Kotaku. Archived from the original on July 8, 2008. Retrieved May 11, 2008.
 Soundtracks  Assassins Creed. Ubisoft. Archived from the original on April 16, 2008. Retrieved May 11, 2008.
 Tracksounds Now!: Assassins Creed Soundtrack by Jesper Kyd. Retrieved October 6, 2014.
 Assassins Creed ps3 reviews at Metacritic.com. GameRankings. Retrieved August 15, 2009.
 Assassins Creed xbox360 reviews at Metacritic.com. GameRankings. Retrieved August 15, 2009.
 Assassins Creed Directors Cut pc reviews at Metacritic.com. GameRankings. Retrieved August 15, 2009.
 http:uk.ign.comarticles20071113assassinscreedreview
 Assassins Creed Review  Xbox 360  Eurogamer. Eurogamer.net. November 13, 2007. Retrieved October 6, 2014.
 Andrew P., Review of Assassins Creed, Electronic Gaming Monthly 224 January 2008: 89.
 Famitsu reviews Dragon Quest IV, Assassins Creed, Guilty Gear 2 and more. Retrieved October 6, 2014.
 Assassins Creed nabs 3740 from Famitsu. Joystiq. November 2, 2007. Retrieved October 6, 2014.
 Game Informer, December 2007 issue
 ESPN  Easy Points  Tis the Season  Videogames Archived December 1, 2007, at the Wayback Machine.
 GameTrailers Assassins Creed Video Review. GameTrailers. Retrieved October 6, 2014.
 Melick, Todd November 14, 2007. Assassins Creed review. GamePro. Archived from the original on November 10, 2007. Retrieved January 8, 2008.
 Wells, Darren June 2008. Assassins Creed. Hyper. Next Media 176: 54. ISSN 13207458.
 GoldStein, Hilary. Assassins Creed Review. IGN. Retrieved 20 April 2017.
 2006 Winners. gamecriticsawards.com. Archived from the original on March 22, 2008. Retrieved March 23, 2008.
 2007 XPlay Best of 2007 Award Nominations. G4. Retrieved December 10, 2007.
 Magrino, Tom November 11, 2007. Halo 3, BioShock top Spike TV noms. GameSpot. Retrieved November 11, 2007.
 Juba, Joe December 4, 2015. Ranking The Entire Assassins Creed Series. Game Informer. GameStop. Retrieved December 5, 2015.
 Ubisoft Announces Outstanding Sales Performance For Assassins Creed and Raises Guidance for Fiscal 200708. Ubisoft. Archived from the original on December 18, 2007. Retrieved January 4, 2008.
 Chart Assassination for Call of Duty  Games Industry  MCV. MCV UK. Retrieved October 6, 2014.
 ELSPA Sales Awards: Platinum. Entertainment and Leisure Software Publishers Association. Archived from the original on May 15, 2009.
 Caoili, Eric November 26, 2008. ELSPA: Wii Fit, Mario Kart Reach Diamond Status In UK. Gamasutra. Archived from the original on September 18, 2017.
 Ubisoft Unveils Assassins Creed II PDF. Ubisoft. Archived PDF from the original on April 19, 2009. Retrieved June 4, 2009.
 Assassins Creed: Altairs Chronicles. PocketGamer. Retrieved October 7, 2008.
 Nintendo lays out Q4 07, Q1 08 slate. GameSpot. Retrieved December 29, 2007.
 Starrett, Charles April 14, 2009. Gameloft previews Assassins Creed for iPhone, iPod touch. iLounge. Archived from the original on April 19, 2009. Retrieved April 15, 2009.
 IGN: New Ghost Recon, Assassins Creed 2 Coming. IGN. July 17, 2009. Retrieved April 11, 2009.
External links
Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Assassins Creed: Brotherhood.
Wikiquote has quotations related to: Assassins Creed video game
Assassins Creed UK website
Assassins Creed U.S. website
Assassins Creed on IMDb
vte
Assassins Creed
Video games
Main series
Assassins Creed II Brotherhood Revelations III IV: Black Flag Rogue Unity Syndicate Origins Odyssey
Other games
Altars Chronicles Bloodlines II: Discovery III: Liberation Identity Chronicles
Adaptations
Novels Lineage The Fall The Chain Brahman Trial by Fire Embers Film
Characters
Desmond Miles Altar IbnLaAhad Ezio Auditore da Firenze
Related
Prince of Persia Watch Dogs Skull  Bones Soulcalibur V
Category Category
Categories: 2007 video gamesActionadventure gamesAssassins CreedVideo games set in the Middle AgesPlayStation 3 gamesSingleplayer video gamesStealth video gamesUbisoft gamesVideo games scored by Jesper KydVideo games developed in CanadaVideo games set in the 12th centuryVideo games set in the 21st centuryVideo games set in AcreVideo games set in DamascusVideo games set in JerusalemVideo games set in the Middle EastVideo games set in RomeVideo games set in SyriaVideo games using HavokVideo games with historical settingsOrder of Assassins in fictionWindows gamesXbox 360 gamesVideo games set in the CrusadesOpen world video games

Assassins Creed II
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
ACII redirects here. For the character set, see ASCII.
Assassins Creed II
Assassins Creed 2 Box Art.JPG
DevelopersUbisoft Montreal
PublishersUbisoft
DirectorsPatrice Dsilets
Producers
Sbastien Puel
Jamal Rguigui
Vincent Pontbriand
Designers
Benot Lambert
Patrick Plourde
Olivier Palmieri
ProgrammersJames Therien
ArtistsMohamed Gambouz
Writers
Corey May
Joshua Rubin
Jeffrey Yohalem
ComposersJesper Kyd
SeriesAssassins Creed
EngineAnvil
Platforms
PlayStation 3
Xbox 360
Microsoft Windows
Mac OS X
PlayStation 4
Xbox One
Release
November 17, 2009show
GenresActionadventure, stealth
ModesSingleplayer
Assassins Creed II is a 2009 actionadventure video game developed by Ubisoft Montreal and published by Ubisoft.1 It is the second major installment in the Assassins Creed series, a sequel to 2007s Assassins Creed, and the first chapter in the Ezio trilogy. The game was first released on the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 in November 2009, and was later made available on Microsoft Windows in March 2010 and OS X in October 2010. Several minor game related features could be redeemed on Uplay and three downloadable expansion packs were released on Xbox Live.

The plot is set in a fictional history setting and follows the centuriesold struggle between the Assassins, who fight for peace with free will, and the Knights Templars, who desire peace through control. The framing story is set in the 21st century and follows Desmond Miles as he relives the genetic memories of his ancestor Ezio Auditore da Firenze. The main narrative takes place at the height of the Renaissance in Italy during the 15th and early 16th century. Players can explore Florence, Venice, Tuscany and Forl as they guide Ezio on a quest for vengeance against those responsible for betraying his family. The primary focus is to utilize the players combat and stealth abilities, as Desmond begins to uncover the mysteries left behind by an ancient race known as the First Civilization in the hope of ending the conflict between the Assassins and Templars.

Using a newly updated Anvil game engine, Assassins Creed II began development shortly after the release of Assassins Creed. The game received critical acclaim from video game publications, with praise directed towards its Renaissance setting, narrative, characters, map design and visuals, as well as improvements from its predecessor. It was the biggest selling game of 20092010 and has sold more than 9 million copies. It is considered to be one of the best games ever made, and it popularized the Assassins Creed franchise. The PC version was met with some criticism in relation to the digital rights management system and, thus had the alwaysonline DRM permanently removed. The game spawned a followup, Assassins Creed: Brotherhood and its direct sequel, Assassins Creed: Revelations. Remastered versions of all three games were released for the PlayStation 4 and Xbox One on November 15, 2016 as part of The Ezio Collection.


Contents
1Gameplay
2Synopsis
2.1Plot
3Development
4Downloadable content
4.1Uplay content
4.2The Battle of Forl
4.3Bonfire of the Vanities
4.4Templar Lair
4.5Bonus skin
5Music
6Marketing
6.1Promotion
6.2Editions
7Reception
7.1DRMrelated criticism
8Sequel
9References
10External links
Gameplay
Players directly control the onscreen character through a thirdperson perspective and can control the camera, allowing for a 360 view of their surroundings. The game takes place in an open world environment with nonlinear gameplay, allowing the player to roam freely within several regions of late fifteenthcentury Italy such as Venice, Florence, Monteriggioni, Forl, San Gimignano, Rome The Vatican only and the Tuscan countryside. The Animus 2.0, a new version of the machine of the same name present in Assassins Creed, provides ingame context for changes and additions to several game elements. A database is also available, providing extra historical information about key landmarks, characters and services that the player encounters. The health system has been made more dynamic, with synchronization to the Animus and causing the character to recover only from minor injuries.2 More grievous injuries require visiting a streetside doctor or use of medicine which can be purchased from doctors or found on bodies.

The player may now swim in water, and Eagle Visionthe ability to identify specific people and landmarkscan now be used in thirdperson view and while moving.2 A young Leonardo da Vinci is present in the game, aiding the player by creating new weapons from translated Codex pages that Altar, the original games main character, left behind for future Assassins analysis and insight.2 Within the game, the player will be able to use Leonardos flying machine based on reallife plans by Leonardo during one mission. The player also has the ability to control a carriage in one level, and can row gondolas, as well as ride horses at any point in the game where they are readily available between towns and cities.2 The setting of the various places the player may go to have been made more detailed and indepth; civilians sometimes cough or sneeze. Additionally, the player can hire different groups of NPCs, such as mercenaries, courtesans, or thieves; these groups can be used to fight, distract, or lure guards, respectively. A day and night cycle has been added to the game, giving the game more of a sense of time, in addition to setting missions and events at certain times of the day.2

There are many ways to interact with NPCs. Money thrown to the ground, or a corpse carried and then deposited on the ground, may also serve as a distraction for both guards and peasants. There are also several different types of enemies, some more agile or stronger than others, and some of which will actively search hiding places where Ezio was last seen.


Ezio stealing a gondola from a small pier
The combat system is more complex than that of its predecessor, with the ability to disarm opponents using counterattacks while unarmed. If the player steals an enemys weapon, it is possible to follow up with an attack that instantly kills the enemy.2 Da Vinci provides the player with specialized weaponry, such as the dual hidden blades, poison blade and the miniature wheellock firearm, which are all based on schematics found in Altars Codex pages. Generic swords, cutlasses, maces, axes and daggers can all be purchased from vendors in each city. The player can also pick up any weapon on the ground or use improvised weapons, such as brooms or halves of a spear. These weapons are used just like normal blunt weapons. In addition, players are able to purchase artwork for their villa, obtain new armor as the game progresses, and even dye Ezios clothing with a number of different colors. Other equipment includes larger pouches to carry more throwing knives and medicine. Six additional weapons can be unlocked by connecting a PSP with Assassins Creed: Bloodlines to the PS3.3

The Auditore familys countryside villa, located in Monteriggioni, acts as Ezios headquarters: the surrounding property can be upgraded, drawing income for the players use. There are several outlets for using currency, with vendors selling items such as medicine, poison, weapons, repairs, upgrades, paintings, and clothing dyes. When these shops are renovated, Ezio receives discounts at the shops on the goods they sell. Purchasing weaponry, armour sets and artwork also contributes to increasing the villas overall worth, in turn generating more income for Monteriggioni.

There is now a broader array of methods for hiding or blending in the area. One can dive underwater to break guards line of sight, and blending may be performed with any group of people, rather than only a specific type as in the first Assassins Creed.2 The game features a notoriety system, with guards more alert to Ezios presence depending on his behavior, location, and current mission. This infamy can be reduced through bribery, removing wanted posters, or assassinating corrupt officials.2

The missions in the game now have an expanded variety, with different structuring. For example, a mission may have the objective to escort someone, but may change to a chase and assassination. Investigation is less explicit, and instead missions may follow people andor a narrative. There are roughly 200 missions in the game; about half are part of the main storyline, while the rest are side quests which need not be completed in order to finish the games main storyline. Cities also contain hidden locations such as catacombs and caves the design of which have been compared by the developers to the Prince of Persia series, where the objective is to navigate the area. Exploring these locations eventually rewards the player with an Assassins Seal; the collection of all six Seals allows the player to unlock the Armor of Altar, in a concealed section of the Villa.

Like Assassins Creed, characters based on historical figures are present in the game, including Leonardo da Vinci, Niccol Machiavelli, Caterina Sforza, Bartolomeo dAlviano, the Medici family, the Pazzi family, the Barbarigo family and Pope Alexander VI.4

Locations in the game include the Tuscany region2 Florence, Monteriggioni and San Gimignano,5 the Apennine Mountains, the Romagna region Forl,5 Venice and Rome.6 Specific landmarks include St Marks Basilica,2 the Grand Canal, the Little Canal, the Rialto Bridge,2 Santa Maria del Fiore, the Sistine Chapel, Santa Croce, Palazzo Vecchio, Ponte Vecchio, and Santa Maria Novella.5

Synopsis
Plot

In the Truth puzzles, certain historic paintings are used, such as the first depiction of a firearm.
After the events of Assassins Creed, test subject Desmond Miles is rescued from confinement by undercover Assassin Lucy Stillman and taken to a remote safe house, where he meets her team, consisting of historian and analyst Shaun Hastings and technician Rebecca Crane. Using design plans stolen by Lucy, they have constructed their own version of the Animus, dubbed Baby, which they intend to use to train Desmond as an Assassin through the socalled Bleeding Effect, which allows the user to learn all their ancestors skills instantly. Desmond is assigned to investigate the memories of his ancestor Ezio Auditore da Firenze, starting with his birth to a wealthy Florentine family in the late 15th century.

Santi di Tito  Niccolo Machiavellis portrait headcrop.jpgPope Alexander Vi.jpg
Assassins Creed IIs plot includes the fictional depictions of historical characters including Niccol Machiavelli and Rodrigo Borgia, later known as Pope Alexander VI.
The story then skips forward several years, with Ezio growing into a charismatic but reckless young man in the time of the Renaissance. After his father and brothers are hanged after being framed for treason by a corrupt magistrate, Ezio kills him and flees to his ancestral home of Monteriggioni with his mother and sister. There, his uncle Mario explains that both he and his late father served an ancient order known as the Assassins, and agrees to train Ezio in stealth and combat. With his new abilities, Ezio embarks on a quest to kill the men responsible for arranging his fathers death, including politicians, bankers, mercenaries, and merchants aligned to the Pazzi and Barbarigo families. The search takes him to cities such as Florence, San Gimignano, Forl, and Venice. During his journey, Ezio also makes a number of new allies, including philosopher Niccol Machiavelli and inventor Leonardo da Vinci, the latter of whom provides him with new equipment based on information left by Altairs Codex. While in Venice, he learns the identity of the Templar grandmaster known as the Spaniard: Rodrigo Borgia, who has been planning to secure all of Italy for the Order by unifying the most influential families behind his leadership. Dressed as a soldier, he confronts Rodrigo while helping him transport an Apple of Eden to Rome. Armed with the papal staffwhich turns out to be a Piece of EdenRodrigo reveals his intention to unlock the Vault, a chamber he believes to contain a power greater than any the world has ever known. He manages to escape, leaving the Apple in Ezios possession. As a reward for service, Mario has him formally inducted into the Assassins.

Around this time, Desmond uncovers a random memory left over from his time at Abstergo, in which Altair is shown impregnating Maria Thorpe, a Templar he encountered in the previous game. He also finds a series of glyphs similar to the drawings he found in his cell, which, when deciphered, reveal a vision of two human slaves stealing an Apple. The video ends with the ASCII codes in binary for EDEN 01000101 01000100 01000101 01001110. The team theorizes that the two humans may be Adam and Eve, the first man and woman.

With several sections of memory too corrupted to access later made available as DLC Sequences, the team sends Desmond to the final memory, set in 1499. With Rodrigo now secure in his position as Pope Alexander VI, Ezio infiltrates Vatican City during Mass and beats him in a fistfight. Rather than kill his nemesis, he lets him live with the knowledge that he has failed.7 Combining the Apple and Staff, he opens the entrance to the vault. Inside, he is contacted by a strange woman named Minerva. Aware that Desmond is listening, she explains how her people, the First Civilization, created humanity to serve them, but were subsequently destroyed by an unknown catastrophe. The survivors joined forces with their former servants, building a network of vaults to both preserve their technology and culture and serve as a preventative measure against a future disaster. Before vanishing, she tells Desmond that only he has the power to fulfill this prophecy, leaving both him and Ezio confused as to what she means.

Shortly thereafter, Abstergo agents led by Vidic enter the hideout, forcing the team to abandon everything except the Animus. As they head to a new location, Lucy informs Desmond that the Assassins have detected strange occurrences in the Earths magnetic field; a solar flare scheduled to pass the planet in a few months would likely trigger the same event that ended the First Civilization. Desmond prepares to reenter the Animus, beginning the story of Assassins Creed: Brotherhood.

Development
Ubisofts Yves Guillemot officially confirmed that Assassins Creed II was in development on November 26, 2008, during the companys financial performance report.8 This was followed by Michael Pachter speculating in GameTrailers Bonus Round that game would change its setting to the events of the French Revolution, which turned out to be false.9

A promotional video was released by Ubisoft on April 6 showing a skull, some hidden blade designs, and Leonardos flying machine on a scroll.10 On April 16, Game Informer released details of the game, including pictures of Ezio,11 a new teaser trailer12 was released, and the game was officially announced by Ubisoft.13

In an interview, in May 2009, Sebastien Puel stated that the development team working on Assassins Creed II had increased to 450 members, and the development teams size had tripled since the first game.14

On June 1, 2009, Ubisoft released a new fourminute cinematic Assassins Creed II trailer at E3.15 On June 2, 2009, Ubisoft revealed the first live gameplay demo, lasting 6 minutes, at the Sony Press Conference.16 GameTrailers features an exclusive developer walkthrough from E3 2009. In an interview with GameTrailers Ubisoft Montreal creative director Patrice Desilets stated Desmond would be doing more than walking around and discovering clues.17

It was announced at the Assassins Creed panel at Comic Con 2009 that a miniseries of three episodes, Assassins Creed: Lineage, would be released showing the events leading up to the game and the history of Ezio and his father Giovanni.

It was also revealed that the humorist Danny Wallace would be voicing a new character in Assassins Creed II: Shaun Hastings, a sarcastic historian assisting Desmond. The characters face would also be modeled after him.18 Actress Kristen Bell returned for the character of Lucy Stillman.19

The game was originally due to be released at the same time on all three platforms, but Ubisoft announced on September 24, 2009 that the PC version would be delayed to the first quarter of 2010 in order to have a bit more time for the dev team to deliver the best quality game.20

Downloadable content
On December 1, 2009, Ubisoft announced the first of several downloadable content DLC expansions for the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 versions of Assassins Creed II. The first, titled The Battle of Forl, continues the story of Caterina Sforza, and was released on January 28, 2010. It also includes a special memory that allows users to pilot Leonardo da Vincis flying machine over Forl. The second expansion, titled Bonfire of the Vanities, concerns the mass burning of sinful objects in Florence and was released on February 18, 2010.21 These were both initially planned to be included as part of the main game, but were later cut due to time constraints;22 this issue was written into the games story as the Animus corrupting several memory sequences. Both the retail and digital releases of the Deluxe PC version include these DLC packages as part of the main storyline.23

Uplay content
Ubisofts Uplay system enables further ingame enhancements which can be redeemed by points that are given when playing the game. The available awards are an Assassins Creed II theme or wallpaper for PC and PlayStation 3, 5 additional throwing knives, Altar outfit and the Uplay exclusive Auditore Family Crypt map.24

The Battle of Forl
The two downloadable content packs feature the corrupted memory sequences, which Rebecca is able to repair with a computer patch. Sequence 12, Forl Under Attack released as The Battle of Forl is set in 1488, just after Ezio has recovered the Apple of Eden. Machiavelli, Mario Auditore, Ezio and da Vinci meet to discuss what to do to protect the Apple, and it is decided that it will be sent to Romagna, to be defended by Caterina Sforza. When Ezio arrives however, he finds that the city is under attack from the Orsi Brothers, who have been hired by Borgia to take a map featuring the locations of the Codex pages, made by Sforzas late husband. In an attempt to force Sforza to hand over the map, the brothers kidnap her children. Ezio leaves the Apple in Sforzas protection; he rescues her children and kills one Orsi brother. When he returns, he discovers that Checco, the other brother, used the distraction to steal the Apple. Ezio gives chase, and kills Checco. As he stands over Checcos body, Checco stabs Ezio. Ezio falls to the floor bleeding, and before he passes out, he sees a man missing a finger and wearing monastic robes take the Apple.

Ezio wakes up with Sforza at his side. He sets out to reclaim the Apple, and Sforza gives him the map of the Codex page locations. He travels to a monastery in the wetlands, where he is sent to Forls monastery. He attempts to speak to the abbot, but the abbot recognizes him as the Assassin who killed Stefano de Bagnone one of the Pazzi conspirators and flees. When Ezio catches him, the abbot names the monk who stole the Apple as Girolamo Savonarola.

The Pack also includes a bonus memory in which Ezio can pilot Leonardos Flying Machine over the Forl area. Unlike regular memories, the player is able to play this memory an unlimited number of times.

Bonfire of the Vanities
Sequence 13 begins in 1497, two years prior to Sequence 14 and nine years after Sequence 12, after the events of Assassins Creed II: Discovery. Ezio has tracked Savonarola to Florence, where the player can now explore the southern district of the city. After meeting with Machiavelli, Ezio devises that bringing unrest to the city will force Savonarola to come out and settle the unrest. In order to bring about this unrest, Ezio assassinates nine of Savonarolas lieutenants who preach within the city. The people become angry and a mob forms outside the plaza, where Savonarola preaches to the mob to disperse. He exposes the Apple to bewitch the mob, but Ezio quickly throws a knife at the Piece of Eden and Savonarola drops it. The mob proceeds to take the monk away, but a Templar courier quickly rushes in to retrieve the Apple; Ezio rushes after the guard and reclaims it. Afterward, the mob takes Savonarola to the Piazza della Signoria to burn him at the stake, but Ezio, believing no one deserves such a painful fate, jumps onto a wooden platform, leaps at Savanarola, and stabs the monk with his hidden blade to spare him the pain. Ezio stands before the confused crowd and declares that all should follow their own path, as he was taught by his mentors.

Templar Lair
These three dungeons, platforming puzzles, similar to the games Assassins Tombs but without special rewards other than treasure, were originally included in the Assassins Creed II: Black Edition European and Australian release, with one included in the White Edition and two in the North American Master Assassins Edition. Ubisoft subsequently offered them as DLC via PlayStation Network and Xbox Live. They have since been included in Assassins Creed II: Deluxe Edition and Game of the Year Edition.

Bonus skin
This costume dye is unlocked by entering a code obtained after buying the Assassins Creed II 3D mobile game from the Verizon App Store. Also this bonus skin is included in the Game of the Year Edition, The Complete Edition and Digital Deluxe Edition.

Music
The score to Assassins Creed II was composed by Jesper Kyd. It was recorded at Capitol Records with a 35piece string ensemble and 13person choir, with featured vocals by Melissa Kaplan.25 A soundtrack was released via download on November 16, 2009.26 14 tracks of the soundtrack were also released on the game disc available with the special preorder Black edition of Assassins Creed II.27

In the marketing, Genesis by Justice was used in the Visions of Venice trailer.28

Marketing
Promotion
On October 20, 2009, Ubisoft announced a series of short films, to be broadcast via YouTube, that would provide additional back story and the introduction of some of the characters found in the game. The shorts, collectively called Assassins Creed: Lineage, came in three parts and were developed by Ubisofts Hybride Technologies, who previously worked on the films 300 and Sin City. The series focused on Ezios father, Giovanni Auditore, and contained liveaction and computergenerated imagery. The first of the films was released on October 27, 2009, with the remaining two released on November 13, 2009.

On November 12, 2009, Ubisoft released Assassins Creed II themed virtual items on PlayStation Home to promote the release of the game, as well as the game Assassins Creed: Bloodlines for PSP.29 Assassins Creed II virtual items and an Ezio costume were also released on the Xbox Live Marketplace for the Xbox 360s avatars.30 On November 19, 2009, more Assassins Creed II virtual items were released in PlayStation Home, along with a costume for Ezio, which was released on November 26, 2009, in which the player could obtain and roam PlayStation Home in it.31 On December 3, 2009, more 15th century Italian renaissance themed items were released in Home.32 Ezios Purple Assassin costume is available to download on LittleBigPlanet, as of December 8, 2009, on the PlayStation Network.citation needed

Assassins Creed II is the first game to be linked to Ubisofts Uplay feature.33 Progression through the game allows Uplay members to acquire points that can be redeemed for bonuses for use in the game, including a new crypt to explore and an Altar costume.34

A novel based on the game, Assassins Creed: Renaissance by Oliver Bowden, was published by Penguin Books in November 2009.35

Editions
There are several different limited editions of Assassins Creed II. The Black Edition contains an Ezio figurine garbed in a black outfit and was released in Europe and Australia. Included also are three bonus areas and missions, an art book, a DVD with part of the games soundtrack, one premium PS3Xbox 360 theme, behind the scenes videos, and 2 desktop wallpapers. The White Edition contains one bonus areamission and an Ezio figurine in his white outfit.36 The Master Assassins Edition is the North American limited edition, which contains an Ezio figurine, two bonus areas, an art book and a Bluray with music and behind the scenes videos.37

After much complaining from Assassins Creed II fans that they were unable to complete the game due to the need to complete the three Templar Lairs only available on the White or Black Editions to earn 100 synchronisation, Ubisoft released Assassins Creed II: The Complete Edition. Included in the package are download codes for the two DLCs, Battle of Forl and Bonfire of the Vanities and the three Templar Lairs. Later Assassins Creed II: The Game of the Year Edition was released, containing the extra content incorporated on the game disc. Both versions also have the Bonus Skin, however, it needs to be unlocked through the game code.

Eventually Assassins Creed II: Digital Deluxe Edition was also released, containing the three bonus areas  missions and the downloadable content Battle of Forl and Bonfire of the Vanities. This Edition, however, is only available via Digital Download. Assassins Creed II: Digital Deluxe Edition as of now is available only on the PlayStation 3 through PSN and PC through Steam. It also has the Bonus Dye for Ezios outfit, albeit it is unlocked from the very beginning of the game and available for free at Monteriggioni.

The PC version of the Retail Edition or the Digital Deluxe Edition now requires a onetime online activation, after which the game, its activation key, and the Uplay Account will be bound together and the game can be played offline, even with the Uplay Launcher forced to run in Offline Mode in the Settings Menu. Even in Offline mode, users can log in into Uplay, provided they have already logged in online with a legitimate email account when they started using the software for the first time.

Users already owning the Retail Edition through Steam can upgrade to the Deluxe Edition.

Reception
Assassins Creed II
Aggregate scores
AggregatorScore
GameRankingsPS3 90.7138
X360 90.0139
PC 83.5040
MetacriticPS3 9110041
X360 9010042
PC 8610043
Review scores
PublicationScore
1UP.comA44
CVG9.41045
Edge81046
Game Informer9.5101
GamePro55 stars47
GameSpot91048 PS3Xbox360
810 Windows
GameSpy55 stars49
GamesRadar55 stars50
GameTrailers9.21051
IGN9.21052
TeamXbox9.51053
Upon release, Assassins Creed II received critical acclaim. Review aggregator site Metacritic gave the PlayStation 3 version a score of 91 and the Xbox 360 version a 90, making it the highestrated game in the franchise on the site.

In an exclusive review by Official Xbox Magazine, Assassins Creed II scored 910.42 Its second review was a perfect score from the Official PlayStation Magazine US, while the Official PlayStation Magazine UK scored the game a 910.41

German magazine Computer Bild Spiele reported that the games publishers offered to provide a prerelease copy of the game if the magazine would guarantee a review score of very good. The magazine rejected the request and instead opted to delay their review.5455

GameSpot which reviewed the PC version of the game, said despite the game being fun and beautiful it was hard to justify the higher price point. It was also mentioned that the game was hindered by Ubisofts DRM and the game deserved better. For that matter, PC gamers deserved better too.5657

According to preofficial sales estimates, Ubisoft announced that Assassins Creed II sold 1.6 million copies worldwide during its first week of sale, representing a 32 percent increase over the first week retail performance of the original Assassins Creed.58 As of February 10, 2010, the game has sold 9 million copies.59

At the 2009 Spike Video Game Awards, Assassins Creed II was named Best Action Adventure Game, and IGN named it as the Action Game of the Year for Xbox 360 and Xbox 360 Game of the Year. Game Informer also named it as Xbox 360 Game of the Year. It also received Game of the Year from GamePro, Eurogamer and The New York Times. Assassins Creed II has been nominated for the Outstanding Achievement in Animation, Outstanding Achievement in Art Direction, Outstanding Achievement in Visual Engineering, Outstanding Achievement in Game Play Engineering, Outstanding Achievement in Original Story, Outstanding Achievement in Original Music Composition, Outstanding Achievement in Sound Design, Outstanding Achievement in Game Direction, Adventure Game of the Year and Overall Game of the Year Interactive Achievement Awards from the Academy of Interactive Arts  Sciences.60 The game was also nominated for several Game Developers Choice Awards including Best Game Design, Best Visual Art, Best Technology, and Game of the Year.61

The game is included in the 2010 book 1001 Video Games You Must Play Before You Die.62 In December 2015, Game Informer ranked the game as the second best game in the Assassins Creed series to date.63

DRMrelated criticism
The PC version of the game utilizes Ubisofts Uplay platform, which includes a digital rights management DRM system that initially required all users to remain connected to the Internet while playing. In the initial retail version, any progress made subsequent to the last checkpoint was lost if the Internet connection was severed. Ubisoft stated that if the disconnection was temporary, the game would pause. In addition, the company argued that there were numerous checkpoints spread throughout Assassins Creed II.64 The company was also criticized by overseas members of the U.S. Armed Forces, who could not play the game while in locations with sporadic and expensive connections.65 Ubisoft has since published a patch to finally remove the DRM: the PC version of the Retail Edition or the Digital Deluxe Edition now requires a onetime online activation, after which the game, its activation key, and the Uplay Account will be bound together and the game can be played offline, even with the Uplay Launcher logged in offline. The game can then be activated many times on the existing or new machine and still be played offline.66

Shortly after the release of the Windows version, Ubisoft claimed that a cracked version of the game had not been created, and was confirmed by at least one website. During the following weekend, the DRM servers for Silent Hunter 5 and Assassins Creed II were, according to Ubisoft, affected by a denialofservice attack. Ubisoft later stated that 95 per cent of players were not affected, but a small group of players attempting to open a game session did receive denial of service errors.676869 A server emulator to overcome the DRM has been developed. A cracked dynamiclink library bypassing the connection requirement entirely was released in late April.707172

Following the series of server outages, Ubisoft offered owners of the Windows version all DLC from the Assassins Creed II Black Edition despite already having the Battle of Forli and Bonfire of the Vanities DLC incorporated into the story mode from the beginning by default, or a free copy of Heroes Over Europe, Tom Clancys EndWar, Tom Clancys H.A.W.X, or Prince of Persia 2008.73

The DRM was modified in December 2010. By that time the game no longer required a constant Internet connection while playing. Instead, the player had to be connected to the Internet every time the game was launched.74 In 2012, Ubisoft announced that they would patch the game to remove internet access as a requirement to play, and would not require internet access for DRM henceforth. It worked on the PC version. The PC version of the Retail Edition or the Digital Deluxe Edition now requires a onetime online activation, after which the game, its activation key, and the Uplay Account will be bound together and the game can be played offline, even with the Uplay Launcher forced to run in Offline Mode in the Settings Menu . The game can then be activated infinitely on the existing or a new machine if the game is ever reinstalled for some reason, and it can still be played offline. The same rule for Assassins Creed II on PC now applies to any Ubisoft game on the PC that once required a persistent online connection.66 However none of these changes affected the Mac OS X version of the game which still requires a constant Internet connection and players still lose progress if the Internet connection is disrupted.

Sequel
Discussions about details of Assassins Creed III were already present before the release of Assassins Creed II, with the game staffs notion of possibly having a female descendant in England during World War II.75 However, cowriter Corey May has stated that the series will never take place during that period, as a major goal was to take players to settings normally unvisited in games.76 Ubisofts Philippe Bergeron stated that potential settings could include England in the Middle Ages, during the era of King Arthur, and feudal Japan, the latter of which had been a personal favorite of many in the staff. However, on March 1, 2012, the setting for Assassins Creed III was revealed to be colonial Boston during the American Revolution, starring a Native American protagonist named Ratonhnak:ton.77 This game was released at the end of October 2012.

Two Assassins Creed games were released concurrently with Assassins Creed II: Assassins Creed: Bloodlines and Assassins Creed II: Discovery. Discovery is set during the missing chapters in II and features Ezio Auditore.78 A direct sequel, Assassins Creed: Brotherhood was released on November 16, 2010 for PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360,79 continuing directly after the events of Assassins Creed II. The game once again featured Ezio Auditore da Firenze as the primary protagonist, and included a new online multiplayer mode.80 The game takes place primarily in Rome, the seat of power for the Borgia family and the Knights Templar. The games primary antagonist is Cesare Borgia, Rodrigo Borgias son.

References
 Miller, Matt November 17, 2009. Ubisoft Gets The Sequel Right  Assassins Creed II  PlayStation 3. Gameinformer. Archived from the original on 6 January 2010. Retrieved 20100111.
 Assassins Creed II It cost 20 Fee required. Game Informer. 20090416. pp. 3645.dead link
 Ferry 20090603. Assassins Creed 2 cheats guide PSP to PS3 linkup. VideoGamesBlogger. Archived from the original on 19 November 2009. Retrieved 20091110.
 Hard News 040909. ScrewAttack. 20090409. Archived from the original on 20091226. Retrieved 20090415.
 Assassins Creed II Artwork, QA  Screenshots. IGN. 20090820. Archived from the original on 20090826. Retrieved 20090821.
 Schiesel, Seth 7 December 2009. On the Scenic Trail of Intrigue: Adventures in 15thCentury Italy. New York Times. The New York Times Company. Retrieved 9 July 2018.
 Ubisoft Montreal. Assassins Creed II. As Rodrigo and Ezio fight for the last time in the Vault... Ezio Auditore: What do you even want with the Vault, Rodrigo!?  Rodrigo Borgia: Dont you know what lies within!? Or do you mean to tell me the great and powerful Assassins never figured it out!?  Ezio: Figured what out?  Rodrigo: GOD! Its God that dwells within!  Ezio: You expect me to believe God lives beneath Il Vaticano?  Rodrigo: A more logical location than a kingdom on a cloud, dont you think? Surrounded by singing angels and cherubim. Makes for a lovely image, but the truth is far more interesting!  Ezio: Lets say I was to believe you; what do you think hell do when you open that door?  Rodrigo: I dont care. Its not approval Im afteronly power!  Ezio: And you think hell give it up!?  Rodrigo: What lies beyond that wall will not be able to resist the Staff and Apple. They were made for felling gods!  Ezio: God is supposed to be allknowing, allpowerful. You think a couple of ancient relics can harm him!?  Rodrigo: You know nothing, boy. You take your image of the Creator from an ancient book; a book, mind you, written by men!  Ezio: You are the Pope! And yet you dismiss the central text of your faith!?  Rodrigo: Are you really so nave!? I became Pope because it gave me access. It gave me power! Do you think I believe a single goddamn word of that ridiculous book!? Its all lies and superstition, just like every other religious tract written over the past ten thousand years!  after Ezio defeats Rodrigo  Rodrigo: You cant! You cant! Its my destiny! Mine! I am the prophet!  Ezio: You never were.  Rodrigo: Get it over with, then.  Ezio: ...No. Killing you wont bring my family back... Im done. Nulla  reale, tutto  lecito Nothing is true, everything is permitted. Requiescat in pace. Rest in peace.
 McWherton, Michael November 26, 2008. Ubisoft Makin Money, Teasin Assassins Creed 2. Kotaku.com.
 McWhertor, Michael November 26, 2008. Rumor: Assassins Creed 2 Goes Back To The Future. Kotaku.com.
 Assassins Creed 2 Debut trailer Video. 1up. 20090406. Archived from the original on 20111005. Retrieved 20090411.
 Assassins Creed 2: New Hero, More Weapons And Missions. 20090410. Archived from the original on 13 April 2009. Retrieved 20090415.
 Assassins Creed 2 UK Story Teaser. GameTrailers. 20090416. Archived from the original on 30 May 2009. Retrieved 20090418.
 Assassins Creed 2 Release Window Announced. IGN. 20090416. Archived from the original on 19 April 2009. Retrieved 20090417.
 Assassins Creed 2s Team Triples. Kotaku. 20090519. Archived from the original on 22 May 2009. Retrieved 20090527.
 Assassins Creed II E3 2009 Trailer. IGN. 20090602. Archived from the original on 12 June 2009. Retrieved 20090602.
 Bennett, Coletta June 2, 2009. E3 09: Assassins Creed 2 footage from the Sony conference. Destructoid.
 Assassins Creed II Video Game, E3 09: Exclusive Developer Walkthrough  Game Trailers  Videos. GameTrailers.com. June 4, 2009. Archived from the original on 7 June 2009. Retrieved 20090627.
 Assassins Creed 2 Danny Wallace interview 1.
 Assassins Creed 2 Full Cast and Crew. imdb.com.
 Assassins Creed 2 PC has moved to the first quarter of 2010. A bit more time for the dev team to deliver the best quality game to you. 20090924. Retrieved 20090924.
 David Hinkle 20100216. Assassins Creed 2 Bonfire of the Vanities DLC comes Feb. 18. Joystiq. Archived from the original on 17 February 2010. Retrieved 20100216.
 McElroy, Justin December 22, 2009. Assassins Creed II DLC was cut from main game due to time constraints. Archived from the original on 25 December 2009. Retrieved 30 December 2009.
 Assassins Creed 2 Coming To PC. Terminalgamer.com. 20100125. Retrieved 20100824.
 Unknown. Assassins Creed 2 comes with a crazy thing named Uplay. Destructoid. Retrieved March 16, 2014.
 Composer Jesper Kyd  Interview at Tracksounds. www.tracksounds.com. Retrieved 20171019.
 Jesper Kyd, Assassins Creed 2, retrieved 20171019
 Reilly, Jim 20090611. Assassins Creed II: Black Edition Revealed. IGN. Retrieved 20171019.
 Sep 3, 2009 20090903. Assassins Creed II Video Game, Visions Of Venice Trailer  Video Clip  Game Trailers  Videos. GameTrailers.com. Retrieved 20100824.
 LocustStar 20091111. This Week in PlayStation Home: Assassins Creed, Final Fantasy XIII, Fullmetal Alchemist and AEs Lawman. Sony Computer Entertainment. Retrieved 20091111.
 McElroy, Griffin November 12, 2009. DJ Hero and Assassins Creed 2 Avatar items added to Marketplace. Joystiq. Retrieved 20091118.
 LocustStar 20091118. Special Thanksgiving Event in PlayStation Home  UNCHARTED 2: Among Thieves Fortune Hunter Edition Contest. SCE. Retrieved 20091118.
 LocustStar 20091202. This Week in PlayStation Home: Iron Fist, Assassins Creed II  Special Holiday Items. SCE. Retrieved 20091202.
 Uplay launches with Assassins Creed II. Edge. 20091118. Archived from the original on 20120905. Retrieved 20091121.
 ACII launches Uplay rewards system. Eurogamer. 20091118. Archived from the original on 21 November 2009. Retrieved 20091121.
 Assassins Creed Renaissance by Oliver Bowdin.
 Your Assassins Creed 2 Limited Edition Choice Is Black And White. Kotaku Australia. 20090724. Retrieved 20090808.
 Polybren 20090804. Assassins Creed II limited edition detailed  GameSpot News Blog  Gaming News and Videos. Gamespot.com. Archived from the original on 20091108. Retrieved 20090808.
 Assassins Creed II for PlayStation 3. Gamerankings.com.
 Assassins Creed II for Xbox 360. Gamerankings.com.
 Assassins Creed II for PC. Gamerankings.com.
 Assassins Creed II ps3 reviews at Metacritic.com. Metacritic.com.
 Assassins Creed II xbox360 reviews at Metacritic.com. Metacritic.com.
 Assassins Creed 2 Review PC. MetaCritic.
 Parish, Jeremy November 17, 2009. Assassins Creed 2 Review for the PS3, Xbox 360. 1up.com. Retrieved 20100111.
 Robinson, Andy November 17, 2009. Assassins Creed 2 Review. Computerandvideogames.com. Archived from the original on 2 January 2010. Retrieved 20100111.
 Review: Assassins Creed II. Edge. November 17, 2009.permanent dead link
 Davison, John November 17, 2009. Assassins Creed 2 Review. Gamepro. Archived from the original on 20100121. Retrieved 20100111.
 VanOrd, Kevin November 17, 2009. Assassins Creed II Review. Gamespot. Archived from the original on 24 February 2010. Retrieved 20100111.
 Tuttle, Will November 17, 2009. The Consensus: Assassins Creed II Review. GameSpy. Archived from the original on November 21, 2009. Retrieved 20100117.
 Assassins Creed II, Assassins Creed II Review. Game Radar.com. November 10, 2009. Retrieved 20100111.
 Assassins Creed II Video Game, Review. Gametrailers.com. November 17, 2009. Archived from the original on 27 January 2010. Retrieved 20100111.
 Clayman, David November 17, 2009. Assassins Creed II Review  Xbox 360 Review. IGN. Retrieved 20100111.
 Gies, Arthur November 17, 2009. Assassins Creed II Review Xbox 360. Teamxbox.com. Archived from the original on 20091120. Retrieved 20100111.
 Aktuelle Ausgabe 122009 in German. Computer Bild Spiele. Retrieved 20091111.
 Good, Owen 20091109. German Mag Claims Ubi Demanded Positive Review On Assassins Creed II. Kotaku. Archived from the original on 12 November 2009. Retrieved 20091112.
 VanOrd, Kevin 20100308. Assassins Creed II Review for PC. Gamespot. Retrieved 20100309.
 VanOrd, Kevin 20100308. GameSpot Video: Assassins Creed II Video Review. Gamespot. Archived from the original on 17 March 2010. Retrieved 20100309.
 Reilly, Jim November 24, 2009. Assassins Creed II First Week Sales Impressive. IGN. Archived from the original on 27 November 2009. Retrieved 20091124.
 News: Assassins Creed II sales hit 9 million  ComputerAndVideoGames.com
 13th Annual Interactive Achievement Awards Finalists PDF. Academy of Interactive Arts  Sciences. 20100121. Archived from the original PDF on 20100125. Retrieved 20100124.
 Uncharted 2, Flower, Assassins Creed II Lead Finalists for the Tenth Annual Game Developers Choice Awards. PR Newswire. 20100119. Archived from the original on 22 January 2010. Retrieved 20100124.
 Mott, Tony 2010. 1001 Video Games You Must Play Before You Die. London: Quintessence Editions Ltd. p. 584. ISBN 9781741730760.
 Juba, Joe December 4, 2015. Ranking The Entire Assassins Creed Series. Game Informer. GameStop. Retrieved December 5, 2015.
 Polybren. Official explanation of controversial Assassins Creed 2 DRM.
 Kuchera, Ben 20100223. The victims of PC gaming DRM: one soldiers story. Arstechnica.com. Archived from the original on 15 July 2010. Retrieved 20100824.
 Ubisoft Officially Ditches AlwaysOn PC DRM. IGN. Retrieved 6 October 2014.
 Bramwell, Tom 20100308. Ubisoft DRM was attacked at weekend. Eurogamer. Archived from the original on 13 August 2010. Retrieved 20100308.
 Ubisoft would consider an offline mode for their DRM once its cracked. Computerandvideogames.com. 20100304. Retrieved 20100824.
 Twitter  Ubisoft: Some gamers are experiencing trouble signing in. Were working on it and will keep you posted. Retrieved 20100426.
 Newspoint.CC  Ubisoft Game Launcher geknackt Update. Archived from the original on 10 April 2010. Retrieved 20100426.
 Ubisofts DRM for Assassins Creed II is Cracked. Retrieved 20100426.
 Ubisofts controversial always on PC DRM hacked. Retrieved 20100426.
 Ubi Confirms Free Stuff For Assassins Creed 2 PC Owners. Incgamers.com. Retrieved 20100824.
 Constant net connection no longer required for Ubisoft games  PC Gamer
 Sebastien Puel 20091013. Ubisoft Contemplates Female Assassins Creed Hero. Neoseeker.com. Archived from the original on 15 October 2009. Retrieved 20091123.
 May, Corey 20091022. History. UbiAssassinsCreed. Archived from the original on 20091224. Retrieved 20091221.
 Philippe Bergeron 20091027. Assassins Creed III to be set in Feudal Japan?. Gadgetreview.com. Archived from the original on 27 November 2009. Retrieved 20091123.
 Totilo, Stephen 20 January 2010. Assassins Creed II Discovery iPhone Preview: Sonicy. Kotaku. Gawker Media. Retrieved 29 March 2014.
 Andrew Burnes 14 June 2010. Assassins Creed: Brotherhood E3 2010 CG Trailer Released; November 16th Release Date Announced. Voodoo Extreme. Archived from the original on 22 June 2010. Retrieved 11 July 2010.
 Next Assassins Creed Will Have Full Campaign, Justified Multiplayer. Kotaku.com. 20100219. Retrieved 20100824.
External links
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Assassins Creed II.
Wikiquote has quotations related to: Assassins Creed II
Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Assassins Creed: Brotherhood.
Assassins Creed II on IMDb
vte
Assassins Creed
Video games
Main series
Assassins Creed II Brotherhood Revelations III IV: Black Flag Rogue Unity Syndicate Origins Odyssey
Other games
Altars Chronicles Bloodlines II: Discovery III: Liberation Identity Chronicles
Adaptations
Novels Lineage The Fall The Chain Brahman Trial by Fire Embers Film
Characters
Desmond Miles Altar IbnLaAhad Ezio Auditore da Firenze
Related
Prince of Persia Watch Dogs Skull  Bones Soulcalibur V
Category Category
Categories: 2009 video gamesActionadventure gamesAssassins CreedFictional sealed locationsFlorence in fictionMacOS gamesOpen world video gamesPlayStation 3 gamesPlayStation 4 gamesSingleplayer video gamesStealth video gamesUbisoft gamesVideo game sequelsVideo games about revengeVideo games scored by Jesper KydVideo games developed in CanadaVideo games set in ItalyVideo games set in RomeVideo games set in the 15th centuryVideo games set in VeniceVideo games with expansion packsWindows gamesXbox 360 gamesXbox One gamesCultural depictions of Leonardo da VinciCultural depictions of Cesare BorgiaCultural depictions of Lucrezia BorgiaCultural depictions of Pope Alexander VICultural depictions of Niccol MachiavelliCultural depictions of Girolamo SavonarolaCultural depictions of Lorenzo de Medici

Assassins Creed: Brotherhood
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
Assassins Creed: Brotherhood
Assassins Creed brotherhood cover.jpg
DevelopersUbisoft Montreal
PublishersUbisoft
DirectorsPatrick Plourde
ProducersVincent Pontbriand
DesignersSteven Masters
ProgrammersStphane Girard
ArtistsMohamed Gambouz
WritersJeffrey Yohalem
ComposersJesper Kyd
SeriesAssassins Creed
EngineAnvil
Platforms
PlayStation 3
Xbox 360
Microsoft Windows
Mac OS X
PlayStation 4
Xbox One
Release
November 16, 2010show
GenresActionadventure, stealth
ModesSingleplayer, multiplayer
Assassins Creed: Brotherhood is a 2010 actionadventure video game developed by Ubisoft Montreal and published by Ubisoft.12 It is the third major installment in the Assassins Creed series, a direct sequel to 2009s Assassins Creed II, and the second chapter in the Ezio trilogy. The game was first released on the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 in November and December 2010, and was later made available on Microsoft Windows in March and June 2011.

The plot follows the centuriesold struggle between the Assassins, who fight for peace with free will, and the Templars, who desire peace through control. The framing story is set in the 21st century and features series protagonist Desmond Miles who, with the aid of a machine known as the Animus, relives the memories of his ancestors to find a way to avert the 2012 apocalypse. The main story takes place immediately after the plot of Assassins Creed II, featuring Assassin Ezio Auditore da Firenze in 16th century Italy and his quest to restore the Assassin order, and destroy his enemies: the Borgia family.

Assassins Creed: Brotherhood is set in an open world and presented from the thirdperson perspective with a primary focus on using Desmond and Ezios combat and stealth abilities to eliminate targets and explore the environment. Ezio is able to freely explore 16thcentury Rome to complete side missions away from the primary storyline. The game introduced a multiplayer component to the series, portrayed as a Templar training program.

The game received critical acclaim with critics praising its setting of Rome, content, gameplay improvements over its predecessor and the addition of a multiplayer mode; the story received a mostly positive response, although several critics found it to be inferior to Assassins Creed IIs. It also won multiple awards including a BAFTA award for Best Action Game. It was followed in November 2011 by Assassins Creed: Revelations, a direct sequel that served as a conclusion to Ezios story and continued the story of Desmond Miles.

A remastered version, along with Assassins Creed II and Assassins Creed: Revelations, was released for the PlayStation 4 and Xbox One on November 15, 2016 as part of The Ezio Collection.


Contents
1Gameplay
1.1Multiplayer
1.1.1Game modes
1.1.2Characters
2Synopsis
2.1Plot
3Development
4Music
5Retail editions
6Downloadable content
6.1Uplay content
6.2Copernicus Conspiracy
6.3Animus Project Update 1.0
6.4Animus Project Update 2.0
6.5The Da Vinci Disappearance
7Reception
7.1Sales
8Sequel
9References
10External links
Gameplay
Assassins Creed: Brotherhood is an actionadventure video game with main emphasis on nonlinear, sandbox style gameplay, parkour movements, crowdblending stealth, assassinations and melee fighting system. The combat system features several improvements and for the first time in the series, the game offers a multiplayer mode alongside 15 hours of singleplayer gameplay.3

The game introduces a new management system: the player can recruit new members by destroying any of twelve Borgia towers around Rome where papal troops are stationed and then rescuing disgruntled citizens in their districts from being harassed by guards. The player, as Ezio, can then send them to assignments around Europe or call them for support during missions if they are not already occupied. Tasking the novice Assassins makes them gain experience, and the player is able to customize their appearance, skills, and weapon training to some degree by spending the skill points they have earned. Assassins can die on missions, from which they will not return. Ezio masters new gadgets, such as Leonardo da Vincis parachute, which can be used when jumping from tall buildings,3 along with poison darts, a faster acting poison, a crossbow, and the ability to hold and throw heavier weapons like axes.


Ezio using the BAM system Brotherhood Assist Move.
The primary setting is Rome, which has fallen into ruin due to the corrupt rule of the Borgia papacy and the Templars over the Papal States and concentrating all the wealth in the Vatican. Just like the town of Monteriggioni in Assassins Creed II, the player is able to invest in the city, witness its development, and unlock rewards.4 The player has to conquer and destroy Borgia towers to free city zones from the familys influence.3 Completing this unlocks new missions and opportunities. Rome is larger than any of the cities in the first two installments Rome is three times bigger than Florence from Assassins Creed II3 and includes five districts: Vatican Vaticano, Central Centro, TransTiber Trastevere, Country Campagna and Antique Antico. Unlike the previous installments, travel between different cities or regions is no longer present, as most of the action in the game takes place around the city of Rome. Instead, a series of tunnel networks throughout the city allow the player to travel to different sectors of the city with ease. However players will be able to explore the entire city of Rome, visit the harbour of Naples, a part of Navarre, Spain, Valnerina, Lake of Nevi and present day Monteriggioni.

The combat system has been modified. Striking first and offensive actions are more deadly in Brotherhood than previous games where counterattacks were the most efficient. Before, this made the player wait until the AI struck, which slowed down the pace of fighting. The AI in this game is thus more aggressive and enemies can attack simultaneously. To dispatch them, Ezio can use melee and ranged weapons at the same time, as well as introducing the hidden pistol in combat. After killing one enemy the player can start an execution streak to dispatch multiple enemies quickly. Ezio can throw heavy weapons axes, spears, and swords at his enemies. There are new enemy archetypes in addition to those seen in Assassins Creed II such as horsemen, arquebusiers, papal guards and others.

Horses play a larger role in Brotherhood, not only used as a means of transport inside the city for the first time but as a component of acrobatic sequences and advanced combat as well, allowing ranged weapons to be used while riding them. Brotherhood also introduces various types of horserelated assassinations, featuring horsetohorse assassinations. There are environmental objects like the flower pot in Assassins Creed II to move faster inside the city a system of tunnels around the city allow fast travel, as well as new objects such as merchandise lifts to quickly climb up high buildings or structures.5

Unlike previous installments, Desmond can leave the Animus at almost any time. This allows Desmond to explore the presentday town of Monteriggioni. The player is also offered virtual training, a minigame where the player may test their freerunning or combat skills.

Like Assassins Creed, characters based on historical figures are present in the game, including Rodrigo Borgia, Cesare Borgia, Niccolo Machiavelli, Caterina Sforza and Leonardo da Vinci.6 Locations in the game include the Colosseum and the Pantheon in Rome.7

Multiplayer
Assassins Creed: Brotherhood is the first game in the main series to feature a multiplayer mode. The players are Templars in training at the Abstergo facility. They use the animi plural for animus seen at the beginning of Assassins Creed II to access memories of old Templars and to acquire their skills using the bleeding effect. There are eight game modes Wanted, Alliance, Manhunt, Chest Capture, Advanced Wanted, Advanced Alliance, Escort and Assassinate and different maps, including the areas from the second and the third game like Florence, as well as new maps like Rome, Castel Gandolfo, Siena and Mont SaintMichel.8 The gameplay in multiplayer mode is similar to the core gameplay of the series, as players are required to use their assassination and stealth skills. The players must hunt down targets while being hunted themselves. Players earn points by performing assassinations, defending against pursuers, attaining bonuses or completing modespecific objectives. It also contains a variety of characters, most of which must be unlocked.

The multiplayer mode also includes a leveling system, which allows players to unlock rewards by earning experience points during the matches and gaining new levels. Players can then unlock abilities, perks and streaks. Abilities are active skills, which can be used again only after a cool down time. Perks are passive skills, which can be equipped before the match and they are active all the time. Streaks are bonuses awarded for reaching certain number of successful or failed contracts.8 The multiplayer beta, exclusive to PlayStation 3 users, was announced at E3 2010.9 It began on October 4, 2010, with early access for PlayStation Plus subscribers from September 27,8 and ended on October 18, 2010. Three maps were playable in the beta: Rome, Castel Gandolfo and Siena.1011

Game modes
FreeForAll
In Wanted, at least six players are on a map where they must find and assassinate each other. Each player is given another player as a target. The goal is to find and kill a target without being seen or killed by the players own pursuer or pursuers. Players are indistinguishable from some of the NPCs throughout the maps. If the player kills an NPC by mistake or otherwise breaks cover, they are more easily spotted by pursuer or target alike, sometimes resulting in a chase. The player with the highest score at the end of the session wins. Players will lose their contract if they kill an NPC, are stunned by their target or their target is killed by another player. A player cannot kill another player who is not the target, but they can stun their hunter. Advanced Wanted mode is a variant of Wanted mode, with differences including an increased amount of NPCs on the map to make it difficult to pick out targets and a less accurate compass. There is generally more stealth involved in this mode than in basic Wanted.12

The Assassinate mode is similar to Wanted, but instead of target contracts being assigned to players, all players are fair game. Players must identify other player characters and lock on before assassinating. Because two players can kill each other, whoever locks on first becomes the hunter and the other becomes the target. The standard compass found in Wanted is replaced by directional arrows based on proximity, that grow to become arcs around the perimeter of the compass as other players near, and will eventually create a full circle when other players are very close. As in other modes, the player with the highest score at the end of the session is the winner.

Team
In Alliance, there are three teams, each limited to two players, both of which use the same persona. The point of this mode is to get more points than the other teams, but each team is chased by another and is only allowed to kill one specific team not the team chasing them, but they will be able to stun the team hunting them. This mode encourages players to work together, as teammates can help each other or they can assassinate their targets simultaneously.8 The Advanced Alliance mode is a variant of Alliance mode, however the players compasses as well as target engagement becomes more difficult, similar to the Advanced Wanted mode.

In Manhunt there are two teams of four. One team is the hunters, the other is the hunted. Each team looks like a specific character and takes turns being the hunter and the hunted. Hunters obtain points by assassinations, while the hunted obtain points from escapes, stuns, and remaining hidden. The team with the highest score wins.12 In Chest Capture there are two teams of four. One team is the hunters, and the other is the hunted who need to steal chests by standing close to them. Each team looks like a specific character and takes turns being the hunter and the hunted. Hunters obtain points by assassinations, while the hunted obtain points from escapes, stuns, and stealing chests. The team with the highest score wins. The Escort mode sees one team of four players protecting a wandering NPC while the other team of four tries to assassinate him. There are two NPCs to protect at a time and they walk through a series of checkpoints, which are visible to both teams. When an escorted NPC is killed, another is synchronized. This mode has two rounds with each team playing once as an escort and once as assassins.

Characters
Players are able to choose one of the 21 available characters, including: Courtesan, Barber, Priest, Noble, Prowler, Executioner, Doctor, Blacksmith, Captain, Smuggler, Engineer,1314 Footpad,1516 Thief, Hellequin a female Harlequin, which is available through uPlay and Mercenary. Two special characters were only available in the selected preorder editions of the game: the Harlequin and the Officer. However, these two preorder special characters are also included in The Da Vinci Disappearance downloadable content as are the formerly preorder only Trajan Market and Aqueducts special locations. The pack contains 4 new characters, Dama Rossa, Knight, Marquis, and Pariah. Each character has unique assassination moves and a signature weapon.17 Characters can be customized as the player levels up. These customization options include changing the color of the outfit, and equipping different gear.

Synopsis
Plot

A portrait of Cesare Borgia by Altobello Melone
Desmonds story continues where it left off, in 2012. After escaping the Templars attack at the end of Assassins Creed II, Desmond Miles, Lucy Stillman, Rebecca Crane, and Shaun Hastings flee to Monteriggioni, establishing a new hideout in the ruins of the Villa Auditore. After restoring the electricity in the old tunnels under the villa, the player once again takes control of Ezio Auditore through Desmonds genetic memory, using the Animus 2.0 which is the games memory interface. Their mission is to find the Apple of Eden, an important and mysterious artifact that could prevent the impending disaster that is coming in that same year, believed to be perpetrated by the Templars.

Ezios story continues in 1499, where he exits the Vault, confused by what he saw inside. He escapes Rome with his uncle, Mario Auditore, and returns to Monteriggioni. Once home, Ezio is comforted by the prospect that his personal vendetta is over; however, Niccol Machiavelli challenges Ezios decision to leave Rodrigo Borgia now Pope Alexander VI alive. The following morning  New Years Day  Monteriggioni is besieged by Cesare Borgia, son of Rodrigo. Mario is killed at the hands of Cesare himself, and the Apple lost to Cesare and the Templars. Ezio escapes with his family and travels once more to Rome, the center of Templar power in Italy, once again seeking vengeance against the Borgias. There, he discovers that the Assassins are failing in their fight against corruption. Determined to rebuild the Guild, Ezio convinces Machiavelli that he has what it takes to lead while assembling a Brotherhood powerful enough to destroy the Templars and his new nemesis, Cesare.

Over the next four years, Ezio executes various tasks meant to cripple the Borgias hold in the capital, sabotaging Cesares resources and assassinating key people close to andor working with him in the process, and slowly restoring Rome to its former glory. After returning the Roman Assassins to full strength, Ezio is given the rank of Il Mentore Italian for The Mentor, and made de facto leader of the Assassins in Italy. During this time, Ezios sister Claudia is also made an Assassin.

Cesare, learning of Ezios actions, confronts his suspicious father and desperately asks for more money, and the Apple itself. Rodrigo refuses, cautious of provoking the Assassins, and attempts to poison his son, realizing that Cesares lust for power cant be held at bay. Cesare, however, turns the tables on his father and kills him instead. Ezio witnesses this and, after learning of the Apples location, retrieves it from within St. Peters Basilica. Ezio uses it to overwhelm Cesares forces and gradually withdraw the backing of his supporters; Cesare is finally arrested by Pope Julius IIs Papal Army after Ezio and the Assassins confront him and kill his remaining followers.

Sometime later, Ezio uses the Apple once more to check on Cesare, who has broken out of prison and, after gaining the support of his new patron, John III of Navarre, laid siege to the city of Viana, in Navarre. Ezio encounters Cesare on the battlements of a crumbling castle and fights him. Cesare claims that he cannot be killed by the hand of a mortal man, thus inciting Ezio to leave him in the hands of fate by dropping him off the battlements to his death. Ezio then takes the Apple and hides it in a First Civilization Temple built underneath the Roman Colosseum.

Using the coordinates taken from Ezios memories, Desmond, Lucy, Shaun and Rebecca travel to the Temple, intending to use the Apple to locate the remaining Temples and keep the other Pieces of Eden out of the Templars hands. As Desmond makes his way into the Temple, he is confronted with holographic apparitions of a being called Juno, who appears to be of the same race as Minerva; however, she is neither audible nor visible to Lucy, Shaun, or Rebecca. Most of her comments center on humanitys lack of knowledge. She states that humanity is innocent and ignorant; that people were not built to be wise, having been given only five of the six senses: sight, smell, taste, touch, and hearing, but lacking knowledge. Her careful cadence then drops, as she suddenly becomes angry, yelling, We should have left you as you were!

As Desmond approaches the Apple and touches it, time freezes around him, though he can still move and speak. Juno cryptically states that Desmond is descended from her race, and is their enemy; she also says there is a woman who would accompany him through the gate, but must not be allowed to. She takes control of Desmonds body and forces him to stab Lucy in the abdomen. Both fall to the ground, with Lucy dead and Desmond entering a coma. As the credits roll, two men are heard discussing whether to put Desmond back in the Animus.

Development
Assassins Creed: Brotherhood was developed by Ubisoft Montreal. Montreal also worked on both of the other main Assassins Creed games in the series and was thus chosen to lead production for the third installment. A new Assassins Creed episode featuring multiplayer was announced during Ubisofts 2009 fiscal third quarter results while not revealing its name. In early May 2010, a GameStop employee published on the internet some images of a preorder box featuring the Assassins Creed: Brotherhood title while Ubisoft was teasing the game on Facebook and Twitter. Ubisoft then confirmed the authenticity of these pictures.18 Brotherhood has not been numbered unlike Assassins Creed II because players, and even developers themselves would have expected a new setting and a new ancestor while this is only the continuation of Ezios story.19

The game was developed primarily by Ubisoft Montreal in Canada. Production was aided in part by four other Ubisoft developers: Annecy, Singapore, Bucharest and Qubec City. The multiplayer mode is mainly developed by Ubisoft Annecy, the studio responsible for creating multiplayer mode in Tom Clancys Splinter Cell: Chaos Theory.2021 Ubisoft also announced plans for downloadable content DLC after the games launch. Two sets of free DLC have already been released under the names Animus Project Update 1.0 and Animus Project Update 2.0. The first includes the new map Mont SaintMichel and one new mode, Advanced Alliance. The Animus Project Update 2.0 was released in January 2011, was also free, and included another map, mode and the introduction of a player grading system.3 From the perspective of performance, Ubisoft have commented that they hope the gaps between the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 versions will be even smaller with Brotherhood.22

Additionally, humorist Danny Wallace and actress Kristen Bell reprise their roles from Assassins Creed II.

While still in development, creative director Patrice Dsilets left before the games presentation at the E3 2010. Ubisoft and production manager JeanFrancois Boivin stated that he only took a creative break after completing his task on Brotherhood.23 A teaser trailer of the multiplayer mode was released on the official site before the E3. A cinematic debut trailer was diffused during Ubisofts E3 2010 press conference along a walkthrough of the games beginning. Assassins Creed: Brotherhood reached gold status on October 28, 2010.24 The Microsoft Windows version has Nvidia 3D Vision and multi screen support through AMD Eyefinity. It also uses Tags copy protection, as well as Ubisoft online services platform, but doesnt require an alwayson Internet connection to play.25 On November 30, 2010, a novelization of the game was published. The novel is a sequel to the previous novel.

Music
Assassins Creed Brotherhood Original Game Soundtrack
Assassins Creed Brotherhood OST Cover.jpg
Soundtrack album by Jesper Kyd
ReleasedNovember 16, 2010
GenreVideo game soundtrack
Producer? 2010 Ubisoft Music
The music in the game was composed by Jesper Kyd, who created the scores to previous Assassins Creed games.26 The soundtrack was released digitally on November 16, 2010. A physical CDDA release of the soundtrack accompanied selected retail editions. However, the tracklisting is altered from the digital release  the CD has 22 tracks, including 3 exclusive pieces, but is missing Apple Chamber present in the digital release.

Assassins Creed Brotherhood Original Game Soundtrack
Assassins Creed: Brotherhood Codex EditionCollectors Edition  Game Soundtrack
Retail editions
FeaturesStandard
consoles  PCSpecial Edition
consoles  PCAuditore Edition
consoles  PCCollectors Edition
consoles onlyLimited Codex Edition
consoles  PCDigital Deluxe Edition
PC onlyDa Vinci Edition
consoles only
Game discYesYesYesYesYesNo Download OnlyYes
Bonus disc with making of and games soundtrackNoNoNoYesYesNo Download OnlyNo
Multiplayer character cardsNoNoYesNoYesYes Download OnlyNo
Assassins Creed: Lineage DVDNoNoYesNoYes Europe onlyNo Download OnlyNo
Singleplayer mapsNoYes Trajan MarketYes AqueductYes Trajan Market and AqueductYes Trajan Market and AqueductYes Trajan Market and AqueductYes Trajan Market and Aqueduct
Multiplayer charactersNoYes Officer or HarlequinNoYes OfficerYes Officer and HarlequinYes Officer and HarlequinYes Officer, Harlequin, Dama Rossa, Knight, Marquis and Pariah
Exclusive packageNoNoYes transparency box with 3D thermoformed portrait of Ezio and Animus effectYes Black, foldout cardboard boxYes collectors chest packagingNoNo
The Da Vinci Disappearance DLCNoNoNoNoNoYes via free updateYes via free, but timelimited download
Helmschmied Drachen armor for EzioNoYes only as preorder bonus in AmazonYesNoYesYesYes
Map of ingame RomeNoNoNoYesYesYes Download OnlyNo
JackintheboxNoNoNoYes The Doctor or The HarlequinNoNoNo
Art bookNoNoNoYesNoNoNo
CodexNoNoNoNoYesYes Download OnlyNo
There are different special retail editions of Assassins Creed: Brotherhood. Different editions are available in different regions. There is also a certain number of preorder bonuses, which may vary, depending on the retailer. Some retailers also offered the access to the multiplayer beta on the PlayStation 3 system as a preorder bonus.2728 All versions of Assassins Creed: Brotherhood for the PlayStation 3 feature exclusive free additional downloadable content called the Copernicus Conspiracy which became available on the PlayStation Store on November 16, 2010. Players have access to several new missions featuring the famous Renaissance astronomer Copernicus. Extra content includes courier, assassination and protection missions  Ezio will be tasked with foiling the conspiracy against Copernicus and defending his philosophy. The PC version of Assassins Creed: Brotherhood was released by Akella in Russia in exclusive Collectors Edition featuring 6 metal figurines of multiplayer characters.29

Downloadable content
Uplay content
Ubisofts Uplay system enables further ingame enhancements which can be redeemed by points that are given when playing the game. The available awards are a Brotherhood theme or wallpaper for PC and PlayStation 3, Florentine Noble Attire, Armor of Altar, Altars Robes, Gun Capacity Upgrade and Hellequin character.

Copernicus Conspiracy
Copernicus Conspiracy is a free downloadable content pack for Assassins Creed: Brotherhood, initially released exclusively for the PlayStation 3 on the games release, later receiving official support on the PC via a patch on 23 May 2017 on both Steam and Uplay and later being automatically being available in the Ezio Trilogy Collection on the PS4 and Xbox One. It focuses on the famed astronomer Nicolaus Copernicus, who gets into trouble with the Vatican, who do not want Copernicus educating the public about astronomy. The pack consists of eight optional missions, ranging from courier, assassination and protection objectives.

Animus Project Update 1.0
The Animus Project Update 1.0 included a new game mode and a new map. The game mode, Advanced Alliance, is a version of the Alliance mode, with target identification and engagement more difficult than in the original, thus providing a more challenging experience for players. With three teams of two players each, Advanced Alliance is a tougher test for players and rewards teams that work together. The new map, Mont SaintMichel, is located on a rocky tidal island of Normandy in France. Its particular topography of narrow streets, highperched belltower, and multileveled architecture is perfect for hunters and predators alike to surge from out of nowhere to execute their prey. To survive, recruits need to use freerunning and narrow roads to their advantage.

Animus Project Update 2.0
The Animus Project Update 2.0 included a new game mode and map. The Pienza Map provides a freerunning playground with wideopen plaza areas, where predators and targets can quickly blend and disappear, surrounded by narrow alleys and multistory buildings for extra verticality. In the new Chest Capture multiplayer mode, two teams composed of three players compete as Hunters and Protectors; partnered with fellow Templars, Hunters will attempt to steal the contents of the chests scattered around the map as protectors attempt to prevent this. Also included in the update is a Templar Score feature to reward diligent work by Abstergo recruits.30 Advanced Alliance is also packaged with the new DLC, while the Mont SaintMichel map is not. Only one DLC can be activated at a time, so players will either be missing the new map from the 1.0 update or the new mode, new map and Templar Scoring from the 2.0 update.

The Da Vinci Disappearance
The Da Vinci Disappearance, on PlayStation Network and Xbox Live, features new content for both single player and multiplayer modes.31 For the single player game, this downloadable content includes 8 new missions, 2 new locations, and 10 trophiesachievements. The multiplayer content includes two new game modes, new map and four new characters.32 The PC version includes DLC for free it must be activated through Uplay along with both Animus Project Updates. In March, the Da Vinci Edition of Assassins Creed: Brotherhood, was released for consoles. This version includes The Da Vinci Disappearance DLC.

The story revolves around Leonardo da Vincis mysterious disappearance in the year 1506. Ezio arrives at Leonardos workshop with his assistant Sala and finds him missing. It is soon revealed that Leonardo found a secret vault and his plans were discovered by the Hermetics, members of the Cult of Hermes. Ezio finds writing on the floor that implies he should seek out five of Leonardos paintings once owned by Ezio at Monteriggioni but now missing. The majority of this sequence focuses on the search for and retrieval of these paintings by Ezio. After finding these paintings, Ezio identifies the location of a new subterranean location in Roma and proceeds there, to find Da Vinci imprisoned by Hermetics. After freeing Leonardo, the two of them find another vault, in which they are revealed the numbers 43 39 19 N and 75 27 42 W. Ezio comments on these numbers It is not intended for us. At the end of the sequence, two male voices one is the Assassin, William are heard commenting that Desmond has fallen into a coma. They also comment we have a location for the temple and then what are you waiting for, lets go. This DLC doubles as the technical Animus Project Update 3.0, with the addition of the preorder multiplayer characters, the Harlequin and Officer, as well as the preorderonly special Drachen Armor for Ezio.

Reception
Assassins Creed: Brotherhood
Aggregate scores
AggregatorScore
GameRankingsX360 90.5533
PS3 89.9234
PC 87.6435
MetacriticPS3 9010036
X360 8910037
PC 8810038
Review scores
PublicationScore
1UP.comA
Edge81039
Eurogamer101040
Game Informer9.2510
GamePro55 stars
GameSpot8.510
GameTrailers910
IGN810
OXM US81041
Assassins Creed: Brotherhood received critical acclaim upon release. Aggregating review websites GameRankings and Metacritic gave the Xbox 360 version 90.55 and 89100,3337 the PlayStation 3 version 89.92 and 901003436 and the PC version 87.64 and 88100.3538 It won best Action Adventure game in the Spike TV Video Game Awards 201042 The game has also been nominated for 7 British Academy Video Games Awards in 2011, including Best Game. It won an award in the Action category, losing to Mass Effect 2 in the category for Best Game.

The multiplayer was heralded by many at E3 2010, where it was showcased for the first time. GameTrailers lauded it as the Best Multiplayer Game of the show.43 The multiplayer portion of Assassins Creed: Brotherhood was generally well received by critics.4044 Game Informer gave the Brotherhood a 9.2510, commenting that the ability to raise a group of followers was a significant enhancement to the previous titles gameplay, and praising the new multiplayer mode as something never before seen. The magazines review also gave very high marks to the graphics, sound effects and voice acting.45

Eurogamer praised everything about Assassins Creed: Brotherhood, giving it a 1010, and particularly noted the maturity of the story: One mission sees Ezio disrupting an assassination attempt in the ruins of the Roman Colosseum during a play about the death of Jesus Christ. It demands a developer of poise and compassion to wield such thorny concepts deftly, and its a measure of Ubisoft Montreals maturity that it is more than equal to the challenge...Brotherhood builds an intriguing mystery around compelling characters, surrounds them with collectibles and secrets, and encourages play  and nothing feels out of place. 40 In December 2015, Game Informer ranked the game as the best game in the Assassins Creed series to date.46

The Da Vinci Disappearance addon was also met with favorable reviews, and holds a Metacritic score of 75100.47

Reviews for the delayed PC version questioned the reason behind the delayed release date as the game was virtually unchanged from the console version albeit with better graphical enhancements and minor bonus content. However most praised Ubisofts move to remove the DRM that marred the PC version of Assassins Creed II as well as include all DLC free of charge.

Sales
The game passed the one million sales mark in less than a week after its release. Assassins Creed: Brotherhood has become Ubisofts fastestselling European title ever. It also had the best Ubisofts launch in Europe and is the bestselling launch title ever as of November 2010. As of May 2011, Ubisoft announced the game had shipped 8 million copies48 and helped the entire Assassins Creed series to achieve over 28 million units sold.49

Sequel
On May 5, 2011, Assassins Creed: Revelations was revealed to be the next major installment in the Assassins Creed franchise. It was released on November 15, 2011. The game is the second to have three playable characters Altar, Ezio and Desmond after Assassins Creed II, which focused on Ezio and Desmond while Altar made a brief playable cameo. It is set in Constantinople, at the peak of the Ottoman Empire. Revelations brought back the multiplayer experience first introduced in Assassins Creed Brotherhood with more modes, more maps, and more characters according to the official announcement. It is also the last game featuring Ezio.50

On 17 September 2018 it was announced by Triton Noir the launch of a board game called Assassins Creed: Brotherhood of Venice.51 It will take place in 1509 set between Assassins Creed: Brotherhood and Assassins Creed: Revelations with Ezio Auditore da Firenze, Leonardo da Vinci, and Lucrezia Borgia; but it also include new characters like Alessandra.52 It was developed by Thibaud de la Touanne,53 it will have more than 20 hours of play,54 and it will be released in November.55

References
 Wilde, Tyler 28 March 2011. Assassins Creed Brotherhood Review. PC Gamer.
 Shea, Cam 16 November 2010. Assassins Creed Brotherhood Review. IGN.
 Gamescom 2010: 13 killer Assassins Creed: Brotherhood facts. ComputerAndVideoGames. August 18, 2010. Retrieved October 16, 2010.
 Gaskill, Jake August 18, 2010. Assassins Creed: Brotherhood for Xbox 360  Preview. G4tv.com. Retrieved October 16, 2010.
 AC: Brotherhood Preview for PC, 360 from. 1UP.com. Retrieved October 16, 2010.
 Miller, Matt 12 October 2010. The Real Life Characters of Assassins Creed. Game Informer. Retrieved 24 September 2018.
 Williams, Mike 25 October 2017. What Are The Best Settings in the Assassins Creed Franchise?. US Gamer. Gamer Network. Retrieved 25 September 2018.
 Mike Walton September 27, 2010. Assassins Creed: Brotherhood: Multiplayer Beta HandsOn. GameSpot. Retrieved July 28, 2010.
 E3 2010: Assassins Creed: Brotherhood Beta Coming Only to PS3. 1up.com. Retrieved October 16, 2010.
 Assassins Creed: Brotherhood Multiplayer Beta Is PS3 PreOrder Perk  Voodoo Extreme. Ve3d.ign.com. Archived from the original on September 20, 2010. Retrieved October 16, 2010.
 News: Assassins Creed Brotherhood beta detailed. ComputerAndVideoGames.com. September 9, 2010. Archived from the original on September 11, 2010. Retrieved October 16, 2010.
 Gallegos, Anthony November 10, 2010. Assassins Creed: Mass Murder  PlayStation 3 Preview. IGN. Retrieved April 9, 2011.
 Niet compatibele browser. Facebook. Retrieved October 16, 2010.
 Assassins Creed Brotherhood  Beta Trailer Europe. YouTube. September 27, 2010. Retrieved October 16, 2010.
 Assassins Creed Brotherhood Reveals: The Footpad North America. YouTube. Retrieved October 16, 2010.
 New Assassins Creed: Brotherhood Characters Revealed. Electronictheatre.co.uk. July 30, 2010. Archived from the original on October 9, 2010. Retrieved October 16, 2010.
 JC Fletcher on July 23, 2010. Kill some time with Assassins Creed: Brotherhood multiplayer footage. Joystiq. Retrieved October 16, 2010.
 Mike Fahey May 5, 2010. GameStop Placeholder Art Names Assassins Creed: Brotherhood  Update. Kotaku. Retrieved July 11, 2010.
 Ubisoft June 16, 2010. Assassins Creed Brotherhood ComDev Conversation  Ubisoft E3 2010 Europe. YouTube. Archived from the original on August 21, 2010. Retrieved July 16, 2010.
 PlayStation 3 News Articles:  Assassins Creed Brotherhood announced. Nz.playstation.com. July 21, 2009. Retrieved October 16, 2010.
 Rob Crossley May 11, 2010. Fivestudio brotherhood for new Assassins Creed. develop. Archived from the original on July 25, 2010. Retrieved July 11, 2010.
 Assassins Creed: Brotherhood PS3 Performance Should Match Xbox 360. GamingUnion.net. November 2, 2010. Archived from the original on November 5, 2010. Retrieved November 2, 2010.
 David Scammell July 9, 2010. Assassins Creeds Production Manager discusses Patrice Desilets departure. GamerZines. Archived from the original on July 12, 2010. Retrieved July 11, 2010.
 Assassins Creed: Brotherhood goes gold, new trailer goes to Rome. Joystiq.com. October 28, 2010. Archived from the original on October 31, 2010. Retrieved November 15, 2010.
 Purchese, Robert February 11, 2011. Assassins Creed: Brotherhood PC details. Eurogamer. Retrieved February 12, 2011.
 Zelfden, Alex Van. Behind the Music of Assassins Creed: Brotherhood. 1UP.com. Retrieved December 31, 2015.
 Yoon, Andrew June 16, 2010. Assassins Creed: Brotherhood gets Limited Codex Edition in Europe. Joystiq. Retrieved October 16, 2010.
 Ubisoft July 22, 2010. Assassins Creed Brotherhood. Assassinscreed.us.ubi.com. Archived from the original on October 17, 2010. Retrieved October 16, 2010.
 Akella. Assassins Creed: Brotherhood. Akella. Archived from the original on April 22, 2011. Retrieved March 9, 2011.
 Gnyp, Piotr October 18, 2010. W Assassins Creed: Brotherhood spotkamy Kopernika We will meet Copernicus in Assassins Creed: Brotherhood in Polish. Archived from the original on October 20, 2010. Retrieved October 27, 2010.
 Assassins Creed: Brotherhoods Da Vinci DLC out next week. Retrieved March 3, 2011.
 News: Assassins Creed: Brotherhood  Singleplayer DLC announced. ComputerAndVideoGames.com. February 17, 2011. Retrieved April 9, 2011.
 Assassins Creed: Brotherhood Xbox 360 reviews at. GameRankings. June 19, 2011. Retrieved June 19, 2011.
 Assassins Creed: Brotherhood PlayStation 3 reviews at. GameRankings. June 19, 2011. Retrieved June 19, 2011.
 Assassins Creed: Brotherhood PC reviews at. GameRankings. June 19, 2011. Retrieved June 19, 2011.
 Assassins Creed: Brotherhood PlayStation 3 reviews at. Metacritic. June 19, 2011. Retrieved June 19, 2011.
 Assassins Creed: Brotherhood Xbox 360 reviews at. Metacritic. June 19, 2011. Retrieved June 19, 2011.
 Assassins Creed: Brotherhood PC reviews at. Metacritic. June 19, 2011. Retrieved June 19, 2011.
 Assassins Creed Brotherhood Review. Edge Magazine. November 18, 2010. Retrieved April 9, 2011.
 Tom Bramwell November 16, 2010. Assassins Creed: Brotherhood Review. Eurogamer. Retrieved April 9, 2011.
 Channell, Mike. Assassins Creed: Brotherhood. Official Xbox Magazine. Retrieved July 22, 2011.
 Spike VGA awards  Assassins Creed: Brotherhood. IT News Online. December 12, 2010.
 Best Of E3 2010 Awards Video Game, Best Multiplayer  Video Clip  Game Trailers  Videos. GameTrailers.com. June 29, 2010. Retrieved October 16, 2010.
 Kohler, Chris November 17, 2010. Review: Recycled Assassins Creed Brotherhood Is Uneasy Blend of Killing, Farming. Wired. Retrieved November 18, 2010.
 Miller, Matt December 2010. Assassins Creed: Brotherhood New features steal the show in a familiar setting. Game Informer.
 Juba, Joe December 4, 2015. Ranking The Entire Assassins Creed Series. Game Informer. GameStop. Retrieved December 5, 2015.
 Assassins Creed: Brotherhood  The Da Vinci Disappearance for Xbox 360 Reviews  Metacritic. Retrieved October 6, 2014.
 UBISOFT REPORTS THIRDQUARTER 201011 SALES. Ubisoft. February 14, 2011. Retrieved February 14, 2011.
 Big Assassins Creed game confirmed for 2011. Computer and Video Games. November 26, 2010. Retrieved November 26, 2010.
 Eykemans, Peter. Ubisoft Officially Reveals Assassins Creed Revelations. IGN. Retrieved May 5, 2011.
 Mastrangeli, Tony 17 September 2018. Assassins Creed: Brotherhood of Venice Coming to Kickstarter. Board Games Quest. Retrieved 29 October 2018.
 Vincent, Brittany 17 September 2018. New Assassins Creed Board Game Features New Story With Familiar Character Cameos. Variety. Penske Business Media, LLC. Retrieved 29 October 2018.
 Assassins Creed: Brotherhood of Venice is the next stealth board game from VCommandos creators. Table Top Gaming. Warners Group Publications Plc. 17 September 2018. Retrieved 29 October 2018.
 Hall, Charlie 17 September 2018. Assassins Creed board game coming to Kickstarter in November. Polygon. Retrieved 29 October 2018.
 Plunkett, Luke 17 September 2018. New Assassins Creed Board Game Has Miniatures, A Campaign And An Ezio Cameo. Kotaku. Gizmodo Media Group. Retrieved 29 October 2018.
External links
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Assassins Creed: Brotherhood.
Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Assassins Creed: Brotherhood.
Assassins Creed: Brotherhood at MobyGames
WPVG icon 2016.svgVideo games portalSamsung Galaxy S5 Vector.svg2010s portal
vte
Assassins Creed
Categories: 1503 in Italy2010 video gamesActionadventure gamesAssassins CreedMacOS gamesMultiplayer online gamesOpen world video gamesPlayStation 3 gamesPlayStation 4 gamesStealth video gamesUbisoft gamesVideo game sequelsVideo games scored by Jesper KydVideo games developed in CanadaVideo games set in ItalyVideo games set in RomeVideo games set in SpainVideo games set in VeniceVideo games set in the 16th centuryVideo games with stereoscopic 3D graphicsWindows gamesXbox 360 gamesXbox One gamesCultural depictions of Leonardo da VinciCultural depictions of Cesare BorgiaCultural depictions of Lucrezia BorgiaCultural depictions of Pope Alexander VICultural depictions of Niccol MachiavelliMultiplayer and singleplayer video gamesAsymmetrical multiplayer video games

Assassins Creed: Revelations
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
Assassins Creed: Revelations
Assassins Creed Revelations Cover.jpg
DevelopersUbisoft Montreala
PublishersUbisoft
DirectorsAlexandre Amancio
ProducersMartin Schelling
DesignersAlexandre Breault
ProgrammersAlexandre Begnoche
ArtistsRaphal Lacoste
WritersDarby McDevitt
Composers
Lorne Balfe
Jesper Kyd
SeriesAssassins Creed
EngineAnvil
Platforms
PlayStation 3
Xbox 360
Microsoft Windows
PlayStation 4
Xbox One
Release
November 15, 2011show
GenresActionadventure, stealth
ModesSingleplayer, multiplayer
Assassins Creed: Revelations is a 2011 actionadventure video game developed by Ubisoft Montreal and published by Ubisoft. It is the fourth major installment in the Assassins Creed series, a direct sequel to 2010s Assassins Creed: Brotherhood, and the third and final chapter in the Ezio trilogy. The game was released on PlayStation 3, Xbox 360, and Microsoft Windows in November and December 2011.

The plot is set in a fictional history of real world events and follows the centuriesold struggle between the Assassins, who fight for peace with free will, and the Templars, who desire peace through control. The framing story is set in the 21st century and features the series protagonist Desmond Miles who, with the aid of a machine known as the Animus, relives the memories of his ancestors to find a way to avert the 2012 apocalypse. Revelations features two other returning protagonists: Altar IbnLaAhad in 12th and 13th century Masyaf, and Ezio Auditore da Firenze in 16th century Constantinople.12 The main story follows the Assassin Ezios journey to unlock the secret of Altars vault in Masyaf using disclike artifacts containing Altars memories.

Assassins Creed: Revelations is set in an open world and presented from the thirdperson perspective with a primary focus on using Ezios, Desmonds, and Altars combat and stealth abilities to eliminate targets and explore the environment. One of the protagonists Ezio is free to explore the Assassin Base in the city of Constantinople and the city itself to complete side missions away from the primary storyline.

Critical response towards the game was generally positive, with praise directed at the narrative, the detailed environments, wellwritten protagonists, pacing of the plot and the satisfying ending of the game, although some reviewers noted that the gameplay of the series was getting overly familiar and the newly introduced features felt lacking in comparison to the ones introduced in previous titles of the series. The game was a large commercial success, outperforming the sales of its predecessors. The game was followed by Assassins Creed III in October 2012, a direct sequel that continued the story of Desmond Miles and introduced a new 18th century playable character.

A remastered version, along with its predecessors Assassins Creed II and Assassins Creed: Brotherhood, released for the PlayStation 4 and Xbox One on November 15, 2016 as part of The Ezio Collection.


Contents
1Gameplay
1.1Multiplayer
2Synopsis
2.1Setting
2.2Singleplayer plot
2.3Multiplayer plot
3Development
4Marketing and release
4.1Retail editions
5Downloadable content
5.1Uplay content
5.2Ancestors Character Pack
5.3Mediterranean Traveler Map Pack
5.4The Lost Archive
6Reception
6.1Sales
7Notes
8References
9External links
Gameplay
Main article: Gameplay in the Assassins Creed series

The main protagonist, Ezio, can use the hookblade to access ziplines across the environments. The hookblade is one of the new features introduced in Revelations.
The game follows the series standard open world gameplay in the Ezio and Altar Sequences, where the games main story takes place. New gameplay additions include an item called the hookblade, which can be used to zipline across the city or grab enemies to yank them in for a combo attack. The hookblade reportedly speeds up navigation by around 30 percent and serves as a replacement to the traditional dual Hidden Blade.3 Along with the hookblade, Ezio also has around 15 different bomb variations at his disposal, which are to be crafted.4 The game features new Desmond Sequences known as Desmonds Journey, five Dalesque firstperson platforming missions in a radical departure for the series.5 Each sequences of Desmonds Journey can only be unlocked by collecting a certain amount of Data Fragments hidden throughout Constantinople, or by purchasing The Lost Archive DLC. Data Fragments are a new type of collectible in Revelations, replacing the flags of previous games in the series.

Also added and expanded are seizing districts of the city from the Templars. While capturing a district is very similar to Brotherhood, the Templars will send reinforcements to recapture districts, which Ezio must defend using a tower defense minigame called den defense, where he controls a group of Assassins from rooftops against several waves of Templar soldiers and siege equipment. Similar to Brotherhood, initiates can be sent on missions to other regions, eventually wresting control from the Templars, and then using the city to produce a stream of income and new Assassin recruits. The game is playable in full 3D across three platforms: PlayStation 3, PC, and Xbox 360, with the console versions supporting both stereoscopic 3D mode for 3D HDTVs and for 2D HDTVs. All Revelations gameplay and cinematics have S3D support.6

Like Assassins Creed, characters based on historical figures are present in the game, including Suleiman the Magnificent, Piri Reis, Niccolo and Maffeo Polo, Ishak Pasha, Manuel Palaiologos, ehzade Ahmet,7 Yusuf Tazim,8 Al Mualim,9 Bayezid II,10 Selim I,11 Shahkulu,12 and Tarik Barleti.13 Sofia Sartor is based on Portrait of a Young Venetian Woman by Albrecht Durer.14

Multiplayer
Multiplayer gameplay also makes a return in Revelations. The mode expands the basics of online modes from Brotherhood with new characters and locations. Players are able to customize their characters appearance. Matchmaking and game interface are also improved. Ubisoft says that although this component is returning, the narrative, which is considered more important to the franchise, is an area of greater focus.15 As players level up in the multiplayer game, they move up in their Abstergo Templar rank and gain access to more information about the company.

New multiplayer modes are added to the already existing modes, including storyoriented quests, as well as a much requested Capture the Flag mode. Some multiplayer maps are based in the island of Rhodes.16 Among the new additions is a new multiplayer mode  Deathmatch  which differs from the previous multiplayer gameplay in that there is no compass pointing toward your assigned target, rather, there is a box in the top right of the screen where your current target is displayed, which glows blue when you enter the line of sight of your target. There is also Simple Deathmatch, which also removes the abilities and perks from the players.

The multiplayer function is protected by the Uplay Passport system on PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360,17 which requires a code for access. Codes are included in all new copies of the game, but are tied to a single Uplay account. This means that players who purchased their copy second hand will need to purchase a new code to access the multiplayer. Uplay players can buy a new Passport code online or activate a free trial.18

Players who preordered the game with specific editions received the Ottoman Jester, the Crusader, and the Ottoman Doctor. Those who played the Assassins Creed Brotherhood multiplayer received the courtesan, a character who also appeared in the multiplayer for Brotherhood. DLC packs for new characters have been released.

Synopsis
Setting
Revelations features all three of the series major characters: Desmond Miles, Altar IbnLaAhad and Ezio Auditore da Firenze. The main part of the story takes Ezio to Constantinople, present day Istanbul, in 1511 AD, consisting of four districts: Constantine, Bayezid, Imperial, and Galata; Cappadocia during the rise of the Ottoman Empire, part of which is a completely underground city populated solely by Templars;1920 and Masyaf, where the old Assassins stronghold is located featured in the first Assassins Creed game, to which Ezio travels at the beginning of the game.20 He discovers Altar has sealed within the fortress an ancient artifact that is said to be a powerful weapon which could end the TemplarAssassin War forever, and had the keys hidden in Constantinople. Ezio uses these relics of the First Civilization that hold memories of Altar to relive Altars experiences, during which players control Altar.16

The game continues Desmonds story in the present day, following the events of Brotherhood, where he is trapped in the Animus 2.0, in a comatose state,21 in which he has found a safe mode known as the Black Room. Here, Desmond must find a synch nexus, a key memory that links him with Altar and Ezio, to reintegrate his splintered subconscious and awaken from his coma.19 While in game, Ezio meets a variety of historical characters, including: Manuel Palaiologos, an heir to the nowlost Byzantine Empire; Byzantine Templars lurking in the shadows of Constantinople;22 Prince Suleiman, a man who will one day become one of the Ottoman Empires greatest Sultans; and his uncle, Prince Ahmet.

Singleplayer plot
Following the ending of Brotherhood, presentday protagonist Desmond Miles has fallen into a coma due to the combined stress of being forced to kill Lucy Stillman and being controlled by Juno, the hologram attached to the Apple of Eden. While Shaun Hastings stays behind in Rome to attend Lucys funeral, Rebecca Crane takes Desmond to New York City and meets with his father, William Miles. In an effort to save Desmonds mind, the duo places him back in the Animus, though this time in the machines safe mode, known as the Black Room.

Upon awakening on Animus Island, the original Animus testing program located within the Black Room, Desmond meets the preserved consciousness of Clay Kaczmarek Subject 16, who occupied Abstergos Animus before him. Clay explains that Desmonds mind is broken, and the only way for him to repair it is by reliving his ancestors memories until there is nothing left for them to show Desmond, at which point the Animus can separate Desmond from Ezio and Altar, and awaken Desmond from his coma.

Desmond enters the Animus Islands memory portal, which places him back in the perspective of Ezio Auditore. Four years after ending the life of Cesare Borgia, Ezio has traveled to the former Assassins fortress in Masyaf to discover secrets Altar had previously discovered, and find the true purpose of the Assassins. Upon arriving, he finds Masyaf taken by the Templars, who mark him for death. Ezio escapes to the bowels of the castle, where he discovers the entrance to Altars library. He learns that five disclike keys are required to unlock the door. He also learns that the Templars have discovered one underneath the Ottoman Sultans palace. The rest lie hidden in Constantinople, capital city of the Ottoman Empire. He travels there and is greeted by Yusuf Tazim, leader of the Turkish Assassin Order, and befriends a young student named Suleiman. Ezio learns that the keys were hidden in the city by Niccol Polo. While searching for the old Polo trading post, Ezio encounters and befriends Sofia Sartor, a young Italian traveller and book collector, and eventually falls in love with her. Ezio discovers the locations of the remaining keys with Sofias help, all the while keeping his intentions, growing feelings and position a secret from her.

Meanwhile, Constantinople is in chaos due to conflicts between Prince Ahmet and his brother Selim, who are quarreling over who will inherit the Sultanate. Caught in the middle of the conflict, Suleiman reveals to Ezio that he is an Ottoman prince Selims son, and that he suspects the Templars are behind the feud. Ezio uncovers evidence that Manuel Palaiologos, with Templar support, is attempting to raise an army to overthrow the Ottomans and reestablish the Byzantine Empire. Ezio kills Manuel and recovers the final key, only to discover that Ahmet is the true mastermind of the Templar plot to open Altars library.

During these events, Ezio uses the keys in his possession to witness Altars life after the events depicted in the first game. After killing AlMualim, Altar took possession of the Apple of Eden and assumed leadership of the Assassins. One of the Assassins, Abbas, did not support Altar due to past events, and for killing Al Mualim. When Altar and his wife Maria left Masyaf for 10 years to repel the Mongol invasion, Abbas staged a coup detat, seizing control of the Assassins and executing Altars youngest son Sef. Altar sought revenge; but as Maria tried to stop him, another Assassin stabbed Maria in the back. Altar was forced to flee with his elder son, Darim, and went into selfimposed exile for 20 years. Altar eventually returned to Masyaf, killed Abbas, and took his rightful place as the leader of the Assassins. In the process, Altar told the dying Abbas the truth of the latters fathers death. Years later, Altar encodes his memories on the five keys Ezio would find, entrusting them to Niccol.

Returning to Constantinople, Ezio discovers that Ahmet has killed Yusuf and kidnapped Sofia, demanding the keys in exchange for her life. Ezio agrees, but immediately gives chase upon ensuring Sofias safety. He recovers the keys, but before he can deal with Ahmet, Selim arrives with his armies and executes Ahmet himself, stating that their father made his choice. Due to his son Suleimans endorsement, Selim spares Ezio, but tells him to leave Constantinople and never return. After completing this memory, the Animus begins to delete excess dataincluding Animus Island. Clay imprints his genetic memories onto Desmond before sacrificing himself to prevent Desmond from being deleted by the Animus.

Ezio and Sofia return to Masyaf, where Ezio uses the keys to unlock Altars library. He finds it empty except for Altars skeleton and a sixth key. He discovers that the library was not meant to hold booksrather, it was a vault meant to house Altars Apple of Eden. Through the key, Ezio learns that Altar had sealed himself inside to preserve its secret from the Templars. Ezio leaves this Apple in the library, stating that he had seen enough for one life. He then begins talking directly to Desmond, not knowing exactly who or where he is, but knowing that he is watching. While talking he discards his weapons, signifying his retirement as an Assassin. He tells Desmond that he realises that he is a conduit for a message, and expresses hope that Desmond will be able to find answers to the questions he and Altar had worked so hard to uncover.

Suddenly, Desmond is approached by Jupiter, a member of the First Civilization. He explains that the First Civilization had built numerous vaults to study methods to save the planet from destruction. All of the data collected was transmitted to a central vault, where the data was tested. None of the methods were effective, however, and they failed to stop the solar flare from destroying their civilization. Jupiter shows Desmond the location of the central vault, which from the map is located somewhere in New York, and tells him that he must save the planet from an impending second solar flare.

Upon hearing Jupiters words, Desmond awakens from his coma and finds Rebecca and William standing with him, along with Shaun, who has returned from Rome. Desmond states that he knows what they must now do; meanwhile, the central vault activates underground.

Multiplayer plot
The multiplayer aspect has its own plot from the Templar perspective. After impressing Warren Vidic in the first stage of Abstergos Animus Training Program, the player is selected to participate in the second stage of the program for further training. Upon being promoted to the rank of Master Templar, the player is allowed into the inner sanctum of the Templar Order, and is implanted with a tracker to ensure hisher trustworthiness. After reaching level 50, the player is dubbed an active agent, and assigned the task of retrieving the current Mentor of the Assassin Order, William Miles.23

Development
Assassins Creed: Revelations was initially conceived as a Nintendo 3DS game called Assassins Creed: Lost Legacy about Ezio traveling east to the Assassins former city of Masyaf, where he would have discovered the origins of the Assassin Order.24 It was first announced during Nintendos E3 2010 press conference.25 It was quietly cancelled and its main concept was developed into Assassins Creed: Revelations.26

In November 2010, Ubisofts CEO Yves Guillemot teased something Assassins related in 2011, despite an earlier statement by Ubisoft Montreals JeanFrancois Boivin that no Assassins Creed game will be released in 2011.27 Geoffroy Sardin of Ubisoft later confirmed that there will be a big Assassins Creed game in 2011.28 Guillemot also explained that ultimate goal for Ubisoft is to release new games in the franchise annually along with Ubisofts most popular other franchises.27 In February 2011, Ubisoft CEO Yves Guillemot confirmed that the next Assassins Creed game would be released during its next fiscal year, which starts on April 1, 2011, and ends on March 31, 2012.29

On April 29, 2011 the games name was released on the official Assassins Creed Facebook page, with a link which led to a flash file.30 The teaser clip included the words, Altar Ibn LaAhad, Son of no one in Arabic which hints that Altar, the main protagonist of the first game, may once again be the main protagonist of the game.30 A third teaser clip for the game showed the city of Constantinople, which hints at it being the setting for the game.31 In the E3 rumor section of its April 2011 issue, Xbox World 360 said Assassins Creed: Revelations is not Assassins Creed III, but suggests that game is also secretly in the works. Revelations was likely to be another slimline Brotherhoodstyle offering, Xbox World 360 stated.32 On May 5, Game Informer released details of the game,1 and the game was officially announced by Ubisoft at Electronic Entertainment Expo 2011.33

The game was developed primarily by Ubisoft Montreal in Canada. Production was aided in part by five other Ubisoft developers: Annecy, Massive, Quebec, Singapore and Bucharest. Lead writer Darby McDevitt said that Revelations would not answer all the burning questions clouding the series, stating Well, we wont answer everything because Desmonds story continues. But fans will definitely know most of the important details of Ezio and Altairs lives, and how they fit into the grand scheme.34 McDevitt also stated that 85 percent of Assassins Creeds overarching plot is already mapped out. McDevitt claimed original Creed protagonist Altar had his story arc written for two years, and that Ezios ultimate fate was planned during the development of Brotherhood.35

Voice of Desmond Miles, Nolan North, urged Ubisoft to adopt motion capture methods similar to Naughty Dogs Uncharted. Speaking in an interview, North admitted there is a disconnect in the Ubisoft games current setup, which has voice actors provide voice facial animation separately from body motion capture, which is recorded by different actors. I wish it wasnt done separately, North said. Dont get me wrong, the mocap actors do a great job, but there will always be somewhat of a disconnect when its done this way. After my experiences on the Uncharted franchise, where the actors do both performance and voice, I can honestly say there is absolutely a difference.36

The PC version of Assassins Creed: Revelations does not force players to always be online to work like its predecessors, despite Ubisofts recent claims that its policy is a success, insisting it has seen a clear reduction in piracy of our titles which required a persistent online connection. Even then, the alwaysonline DRM was permanently removed from all singleplayer games. It does, however, require a onetimeonly online activation the very first time the player plays the game, which will permanently bind the activation code to the players account, and thus, it does not need to be activated again on the same account if the game is reinstalled for some reason. This also applies to reinstalling on another computer. Following that, the player can permanently play the game in offline mode.37

Marketing and release
Ubisoft announced a PlayStation Network timed exclusive multiplayer beta for Assassins Creed Revelations on August 10, 2011. The beta began on September 3, 2011 and finished September 17, 2011, exclusively for PlayStation Plus and Uplay members on PlayStation 3. On September 8, the multiplayer beta opened to everyone with a PSN account. The beta offered access to nine characters The Sentinel, The Vanguard, The Guardian, The Vizier, The Thespian, The Deacon, The Bombardier, The Trickster, The Champion  all boasting different abilities, three maps Knights Hospital, Antioch, Galata and four playable modes the previously seen Wanted and Manhunt options joined by new Deathmatch and Artifact Assault variants.3839

Media Molecule announced on November 15, 2011 that a new Ezio costume for Sackboy will be made available in LittleBigPlanet 2 to promote the launch of Assassins Creed: Revelations.40 Those who preordered through Best Buy got an exclusive multiplayer character.41 All day one copies of Revelations for the PlayStation 3 had the first Assassins Creed bundled as part of the disc, which launched in 2007. Ubisoft called the announcement a special partnership between itself and Sony Computer Entertainment America, and that the deal only applies in Europe.42 Additionally, Ubisoft released an Assassins Creed: Revelations Avatar collection Xbox 360, which includes a Codex prop, Desmonds black hoodie, and a pet eagle. Also, the following outfits will be available: Ezio, Bombardier, Guardian, Sentinel, and Vanguard female only.41

Retail editions
FeaturesStandard
consoles  PCAnimus Edition
consoles  PC434445Collectors Edition
consoles  PC434445Special Edition
consoles  PC434445Signature Edition
consoles  PC434445Gold Edition
PC Download434445Ultimate Bundle
consoles  PC46Ottoman Edition
consoles  PC47
Game discYesYesYesYesYesNo, DownloadYesYes
Exclusive packagingNoYes Animus box packagingYes Special Collectors Edition packagingYes standard box with exclusive artworkYes Black and white variant of standard box artNoYes Black, foldout cardboard boxYes
Indepth encyclopediaNoYesNoNoNoNoNoNo
50page art bookNoNoYesNoNoNoNoNo
The original games soundtrackNoYesYesYesYesNoYesNo
Assassins Creed Embers Movie DVDNoYesYesNoYesNoYesNo
Exclusive singleplayer missionNoYes Vlad the Impaler PrisonYes Vlad the Impaler PrisonNoYes Vlad the Impaler PrisonYes Vlad the Impaler PrisonYes Vlad the Impaler PrisonYes Vlad the Impaler Prison
The Lost Archive DLCNoNoNoNoNoYesNoYes
Exclusive multiplayer characterNoYes The Crusader and Ottoman JesterYes The Crusader and Ottoman JesterYes The Crusader and Ottoman DoctorYes Ottoman JesterYes The Crusader, Ottoman Jester and Ottoman DoctorYes Ottoman JesterYes The Crusader, Ottoman Jester and Ottoman Doctor
Exclusive armor for EzioNoYes Armor of BrutusYes Turkish Armor and Armor of BrutusYes Turkish ArmorNoYes Turkish Armor and Armor of BrutusNoYes Turkish Armor and Armor of Brutus
Altar SkinEzio in Altars RobesNoYes as a preorder bonus from EB Games AustraliaYes as a preorder bonus from Play UKNoNoYesNoYes
Capacity upgradesNoYes For hidden gun bullets, bombs  crossbow arrowsYes For hidden gun bullets, bombs  crossbow arrowsNoYes For hidden gun bullets, bombs  crossbow arrowsYes For hidden gun bullets, bombs  crossbow arrowsYes For hidden gun bullets, bombs  crossbow arrowsYes For hidden gun bullets, bombs  crossbow arrows
Leonardo da Vincis flying machine 67 scale replicaNoNoNoNoNoNoYesNo
Ezio 7inch action figureNoNoNoNoNoNoYesNo
There are several different limited editions of Assassins Creed Revelations. The Animus, Collectors and Special editions were available on all platforms and only in Europe, Australia and New Zealand, while the Signature Edition was only available in North America through GameStop for all platforms.41434445 Those who preordered Assassins Creed: Revelations through GameStop automatically upgraded to the Signature Edition of the game at no extra cost. The Signature Edition features exclusive packaging, a bonus singleplayer mission Vlad the Impaler Prison, an exclusive multiplayer character Ottoman Jester, weapons capacity upgrades, an animated short film Assassins Creed Embers Movie and the original games soundtrack.4148

The PS3Only edition includes the standard game contents plus a complete version of the Assassins Creed original game included in the game disc. This edition is only available to those who bought the game when it first released or preordered it.49 The Animus Edition features an Animus box, an indepth encyclopedia, an animated short film Assassins Creed Embers Movie and the original games soundtrack. Ingame content included is an exclusive mission Vlad the Impaler Prison, an armor from Assassins Creed: Brotherhood Armor of Brutus in singleplayer, weapons capacity upgrades, and two additional multiplayer characters The Crusader and Ottoman Jester.434445

The Gold Edition is digitally exclusive to the PC. It is available on Uplay and Steam and it contains all the downloadable and redeemable content available on Uplay.

Downloadable content
Uplay content
Ubisofts Uplay system enables further ingame enhancements which can be redeemed by points that are given when playing the game. The available awards are a Revelations theme or wallpaper for PC and PlayStation 3, Solo Pack, Mediterranean Exclusive Missions, and Multiplayer Pack which unlocks the Knight.

Ancestors Character Pack
On the day of the games launch, Ubisoft announced that it was working on various downloadable Content DLC for the game. The first one announced was a character pack, which was released in December 2011.needs update The character pack included four new multiplayer characters which include the Privateer, Corsair, Brigand, and Gladiator.

Mediterranean Traveler Map Pack
The second DLC pack announced was the Mediterranean Traveler Map Pack, which was released on January 24, 2012. The contents of the pack include six new multiplayer maps, three of which return from Assassins Creed: Brotherhood.50

The Lost Archive
During his time in the Black Room, Desmond Miles relived the memories passed to him by a virtual construct of Clay Kaczmarek, his predecessor in the Animus Project. The memories related to Clay becoming a member of the Assassins, being assigned to infiltrate Abstergo Industries Animus Project laboratory in Italy, and discovering what Warren Vidic hoped to achieve by exploring the genetic memories of various Assassin figures.

Lucy Stillman, an Assassin herself, had been placed within the facility to rescue Clay when his mission was complete. In his memories, Clay recalled his fathers disregard for his career goals, demanding that Clay should instead become an engineer to provide for his family. Clay believed that his fathers focus on wealth pushed his mother away from the family.

Clay eventually realised that Vidic was using these genetic memories to discover the locations of the Pieces of Eden in the modern era. In particular, Vidic focused on locating an Apple of Eden, which was meant to be launched aboard a satellite to control the minds of humanity across the Earth. Clay also discovered Lucy discussing her true loyalty to the Templars with Vidic, and revealed her actual motives, which were to remove Desmond from the Abstergo facility and transport him to a more comfortable environment, where she would use the Assassins resources to allow Desmond to discover the location of the Apple and recover it for the Templars.

Lucy, having sworn to protect Clay, wiped the security feed showing that he had seen their discussion, but did not let him leave the facility, to prevent her true allegiances from being discovered. The memories continued in a loop, until Desmond collected the scattered memory fragments, which revealed Clay emailing his father and telling him not to worry about his disappearance, because he had found a greater purpose to serve, foreshadowing his suicide.

This DLC pack is available for purchase separately and bundled with the Ottoman and Gold Edition.

Reception
Reception
Aggregate score
AggregatorScore
MetacriticPS3 8010051
X360 8010052
PC 8010053
Review scores
PublicationScore
1UP.comB54
Destructoid7.51055
Edge71056
Eurogamer71057
Game Informer8.751064
GamePro71063
GameSpot8.01061
GamesRadar81058
GameTrailers8.81060
IGN8.51059
Joystiq45 stars65
OPM UK91067
OXM US8.51066
VideoGamer.com71062
Assassins Creed: Revelations received generally positive reviews from critics upon release. Aggregating review websites GameRankings and Metacritic gave the PlayStation 3 version 80.05 and 80100,6851 the Xbox 360 version 79.37 and 80100,6952 and the PC version 74.67 and 80100 respectively.7053 IGN gave the game a rating of 8.5 out of 10, stating This is the best Assassins Creed yet, even if that victory is claimed by an inch and not a mile. If youve been following the lives of Altair and Ezio this long, you owe it to yourself to see their last adventure.59 1UP gave the game a rating of B, stating While Revelations lacks that one supreme improvement or standout mechanic that defined AC2 and Brotherhood each, its still a damn fine sendoff for Altair and Ezio.54

Edge gave the game a rating of 7 out of 10, saying that unlike the elegant lead, whos greyhaired but unbowed by the end of the adventure, Assassins Creed has been quietly compromised by age.56 Eurogamer also gave the game a rating of 7 out of 10, writing where Brotherhood enhanced the thrill of being Ezio Auditore, Revelations distracts from it. Ezio may look old, but its the series itself that really shows its age.57

VideoGamer gave the game a rating of 7 out of 10, stating So, for the first time, a new Assassins Creed game is worse than its predecessor, the first time the short development period has had a noticeable impact on the games quality. Its a game of nearlies and mighthavebeens: summed up by the hookblade, a supposedly key new feature which in practice merely extends Ezios reach slightly, and allows him to glide down the occasional zipline.62 GamePro also gave the game a rating of 7 out of 10, saying that at its core, this is the Assassins Creed weve grown to love in recent years, and it still serves as a pretty good time sink  plus, its a necessary bridge to next years alreadyannounced followup. But obligation shouldnt be the primary reason to play something, and sadly, thats too often the case in this humdrum campaign.63

Game Informer gave the game a rating of 8.75 out of 10, writing a number of new features have been attempted to make Revelations feel new and different from its predecessors. In that quest for broader variety and a unique identity from the earlier games, Revelations makes some missteps that are hard to ignore. However, the game offers more of what has been great about the franchise, and that should be enough to bring most fans to the table, even if it a poor starting point for new players.64 GameTrailers also gave the game a rating of 8.8 out of 10, saying that the engine is a bit long in the tooth and some of the content isnt entirely worth exploring, but if youre looking for an unforgettable top shelf actionadventure, heed the creed.60

Official Xbox Magazine gave the game a rating of 8.5 out of 10, stating Whats available here remains as ridiculously appealing as ever. Its still a thrill unique to the series to be perched six stories high, looking out across miles of meticulously rendered game world  even if that dazzling, dangerfilled world has grown overly familiar, having traded what was once revolution for iterative evolution.66 UK Official PlayStation Magazine gave the game a rating of 9 out of 10, stating As a conclusion for Ezios chapter, Revelations proves an utterly brilliant swansong.67

In December 2015, Game Informer ranked the game as the seventh best game in the Assassins Creed series to date.71

Sales
Ubisoft CEO Yves Guillemot announced during an earnings call on November 8, 2011, that preorders for Assassins Creed: Revelations were significantly higher than figures for Assassins Creed: Brotherhood, yet the firm is still expecting a double digit decline in sales for Revelations compared to the other title.72 According to NPD Group, Revelations was the fourthbest selling game in the U.S. in November 2011. Ubisoft announced sales of Revelations were up 10 percent yearonyear on 2010s Brotherhood. That puts Revelations first month total at around 1.26 million.73 Revelations debuted at second place in the UK video game sales chart in its first week. Its week one numbers were better than those of its predecessor Brotherhood by four percent in unit terms and eight percent in revenue, making it the best performing title both in the series and in Ubisofts history to date. 61 percent of the games sales occurred in the first 24 hours.74 As of February 15, 2012, the game has shipped 7 million copies worldwide.75

Notes
 Additional work by Ubisoft Annecy, Ubisoft Bucharest, Massive Entertainment, Ubisoft Quebec and Ubisoft Singapore. Ported to Microsoft Windows by Ubisoft Kiev and Ubisoft Bucharest.
References
 Matt Miller May 5, 2011. June Cover Revealed: Assassins Creed Revelations. Game Informer. Retrieved May 5, 2011.
 Assassins Creed Revelations: Assassins Dens Explained, Gamerant. Game Rant. 27 May 2011. Retrieved 6 October 2014.
 Assassins Creed Revelations Stars Ezio and Altair  IGN. M.ign.com. Archived from the original on 20120425. Retrieved 20111229.
 E3 2011: Assassins Creed: Revelations Impressions. Gamespot.com. 20110607. Retrieved 20110610.
 Phillips, Tom November 9, 2011. AC:R Has First Person Missions. Eurogamer. Retrieved November 10, 2011.
 Assassins Creed: Revelations goes Three ways. kotaku.com. Retrieved 20111014.
 History Behind The Game: Assassins Creed Revelations Characters. Gamer Crash. WordPress. 4 January 2012. Retrieved 25 September 2018.
 Miller, Matt 17 May 2011. The Characters Of Assassins Creed Revelations. Game Informer. Retrieved 25 September 2018.
 Al Mualim. IGN. Ziff Davis, LLC. 29 December 2011. Retrieved 25 September 2018.
 Bayezid II. IGN. Ziff Davis, LLC. 29 December 2011. Retrieved 25 September 2018.
 Selim I. IGN. Ziff Davis, LLC. 1 January 2012. Retrieved 25 September 2018.
 Shahkulu. IGN. Ziff Davis, LLC. 31 December 2011. Retrieved 25 September 2018.
 Tarik Barleti. IGN. Ziff Davis, LLC. 31 December 2011. Retrieved 25 September 2018.
 Gaweda, Sebastian 2011. The Characters of Assassins Creed Revelations. Game Rant. Warp 10 LLC. Retrieved 25 September 2018.
 Game Informer detailed Assassins Creed Revelations information. scrawlfx.com. 20110605. Retrieved 20160708.
 Game Informer, Issue 218, June 2011
 Uplay Passport FAQ. ubi.com. 20111018. Retrieved 20111018.dead link
 Assassins Creed: Revelations Online Pass Details. Eurogamer. November 15, 2011. Retrieved November 18, 2011.
 Assassins Creed Revelations info landslide. www.psu.com. 20110508. Retrieved 20110508.
 Juba, Joe May 23, 2011. The Places Youll Go In Assassins Creed: Revelations. Game Informer. Archived from the original on 9 June 2011. Retrieved 25 May 2011.
 Juba, Joe May 25, 2011. AC Revelations: Back To The Present. Game Informer. Retrieved May 31, 2011.
 Assassins Creed Revelations Developer Interview. Retrieved 20110620.
 Ubisoft Montreal November 15, 2011. Assassins Creed: Revelations. Xbox 360, PS3, PC. Ubisoft.
 Makuch, Eddie 20100615 Assassins Creed, Driver, Splinter Cell, reimagined for 3DS Archived March 28, 2012, at the Wayback Machine.. GameSpot. Retrieved 20101030.
 Mario Kart, Pilotwings, Animal Crossing, Star Fox confirmed for 3DS. Official Nintendo Magazine. Retrieved 20101030.
 Gilbert, Ben. Assassins Creed: Lost Legacys concept found in Revelations. Joystiq.
 Assassins Creed 2011 confirmed. Eurogamer. Archived from the original on 27 December 2010. Retrieved 20101116.
 Big Assassins Creed game confirmed for 2011. Computer and Video Games. 20101126. Retrieved 20101126.
 New Assassins Creed in the works. Gamespot. 20110214.
 Mike Fahey April 29, 2011. Did Ubisoft Just Leak the Next Assassins Creed Game?. Kotaku. Gawker Media. Retrieved May 5, 2011.
 Mike Fahey May 3, 2011. Assassins Creeds Latest Tease Takes Us to Istanbul. Kotaku. Gawker Media. Retrieved May 5, 2011.
 Ivan, Tom. Next Assassins Creed is likely another Brotherhood. Computer And Video Games. Retrieved 20111229.
 E3 2011: Trailer. GameTrailers. 14 November 2011. Retrieved 6 October 2014.
 computerandvideogames.com Andy Robinson 20110715. News: Assassins Creed Revelations wont answer everything, teases writer. ComputerAndVideoGames.com. Retrieved 20111229.
 computerandvideogames.com Andy Robinson 20110802. News: 85 of Assassins Creeds plot already mapped out, writer reveals. ComputerAndVideoGames.com. Retrieved 20111229.
 Nolan North Urges AC To Adopt UC MoCap. CVG. Retrieved December 25, 2011.
 YinPoole, Wesley November 10, 2011. AC:R Doesnt Have Always On DRM. Eurogamer. Retrieved November 10, 2011.
 Assassins Creed Revelations MP beta is timed PS3 exclusive. CVG. Retrieved 20110815.
 Haas, Pete September 7, 2011. Assassins Creed: Revelations Beta Open To All PS3 Players Tomorrow. Retrieved September 21, 2011.
 Ezio Costume For Sackboy Hitting LBP2 On November 15, 2011. VG247. November 3, 2011. Retrieved November 18, 2011.
 GameStop preorders of AC: Revelations get upgraded to Signature Edition. VG247. Retrieved 20110815.
 Cullen, Johnny 20110920. Assassins Creed Revelations PS3 To Feature Original AC. Retrieved September 30, 2011.
 Assassins Creed: Revelations  Animus  Special Limited Editions Announced for Australia. OXCGN. Retrieved 20110815.
 Assassins Creed Special Edition detailed for UK. VG247. Retrieved 20110815.
 Assassins Creed Revelations Collectors, Animus editions detailed. CVG. Retrieved 20110815.
 Nunneley, Stephany 20110825. Assassins Creed Revelations Ultimate Bundle Listed By Gamestop. Retrieved September 30, 2011.
 Assassins Creed  Ottoman Edition  amazon.co.uk
 Watts, Steve. Assassins Creed Revelations gets Signature upgrade at GameStop. Shacknews. Retrieved 20111229.
 Assassins Creed Revelations for PS3 Getting Big Bluray Bonus. Gabriel Graziani. Retrieved 20110920.
 Goldfarb, Andrew November 15, 2011. First Assassins Creed: Revelations DLC Announced. IGN. Retrieved November 15, 2011.
 Assassins Creed: Revelations PlayStation 3 reviews at. Metacritic. 20120103. Retrieved 20120103.
 Assassins Creed: Revelations Xbox 360 reviews at. Metacritic. 20120103. Retrieved 20120103.
 Assassins Creed: Revelations PC reviews at. Metacritic. 20120103. Retrieved 20120103.
 Nguyen, Thierry November 14, 2011. 1UPs Review For Assassins Creed: Revelations. Retrieved November 15, 2011.
 Tan, Maurice November 14, 2011. Destructoids Review For Assassins Creed: Revelations. Retrieved November 15, 2011.
 Edges Review For Assassins Creed: Revelations. Retrieved November 16, 2011.
 Eurogamers Review For Assassins Creed: Revelations. Retrieved November 16, 2011.
 Gameradars Review For Assassins Creed: Revelations. Retrieved November 16, 2011.
 George, Richard November 14, 2011. IGNs Review For Assassins Creed: Revelations. Retrieved November 15, 2011.
 GameTrailers Review For Assassins Creed: Revelations. Retrieved November 16, 2011.
 VanOrd, Kevin November 14, 2011. Gamespots Review For Assassins Creed: Revelations. Retrieved November 15, 2011.
 Videogamers Review For Assassins Creed: Revelations. Retrieved November 16, 2011.
 Gamepros Review For Assassins Creed: Revelations. Archived from the original on 20111201. Retrieved November 16, 2011.
 GameInformers Review For Assassins Creed: Revelations. Retrieved November 16, 2011.
 Gies, Arthur November 14, 2011. Joystiqs Review For Assassins Creed: Revelations. Retrieved November 15, 2011.
 Official Xbox Magazines Review For Assassins Creed: Revelations. Retrieved November 16, 2011.
 Official Xbox Magazines UK Review For Assassins Creed: Revelations. Archived from the original on April 21, 2013. Retrieved November 16, 2011.
 Assassins Creed: Revelations PlayStation 3 reviews at. GameRankings. 20120103. Retrieved 20120103.
 Assassins Creed: Revelations Xbox 360 reviews at. GameRankings. 20120103. Retrieved 20120103.
 Assassins Creed: Revelations PC reviews at. GameRankings. 20120103. Retrieved 20120103.
 Juba, Joe December 4, 2015. Ranking The Entire Assassins Creed Series. Game Informer. GameStop. Retrieved December 5, 2015.
 Nunneley, Stephany November 8, 2011. AC:R PreOrders Significantly Higher Than Brotherhood. Retrieved November 10, 2011.
 Dutton, Fred 20111210. Rayman Origins sells 50,000 in debut US month. Eurogamer. Retrieved 20111210.
 Parfitt, Ben November 21, 2011. UK CHARTS: Modern Warfare 3 resists new release rivals. Retrieved November 23, 2011.
 Assassins Creed: Revelations ships 7 million. GameSpot. Retrieved 6 October 2014.
External links
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Assassins Creed: Revelations.
Wikiquote has quotations related to: Assassins Creed: Revelations
Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Assassins Creed: Brotherhood.
Assassins Creed: Revelations on IMDb
Assassins Creed: Revelations at MobyGames
WPVG icon 2016.svgVideo games portalSamsung Galaxy S5 Vector.svg2010s portal
vte
Assassins Creed
Categories: 2011 video games1510s in fictionActionadventure gamesAssassins CreedOttoman Empire in fictionByzantine Empire in art and cultureMultiplayer online gamesOpen world video gamesPlayStation 3 gamesPlayStation 4 gamesStealth video gamesUbisoft gamesVideo game sequelsVideo games scored by Jesper KydVideo games developed in CanadaVideo games set in the 16th centuryVideo games set in TurkeyVideo games set in SyriaVideo games with stereoscopic 3D graphicsWindows gamesXbox 360 gamesXbox One gamesFictional sealed locationsMultiplayer and singleplayer video gamesVideo games set in the Middle Ages

Assassins Creed III
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
Assassins Creed III
Assassins Creed III Game Cover.jpg
DevelopersUbisoft Montreal
PublishersUbisoft
DirectorsAlex Hutchinson
ProducersFrancois Pelland
DesignersSteven Masters
ProgrammersDavid Champagne
ArtistsThe Chinh Ngo
WritersCorey May
ComposersLorne Balfe
SeriesAssassins Creed
EngineAnvilNext
PlatformsPlayStation 3
Xbox 360
Wii U1
Microsoft Windows
PlayStation 4
Xbox One
ReleasePlayStation 3  Xbox 360
NA: October 30, 20123
EU: October 31, 20122
AU: October 31, 2012
Wii U
NA: November 18, 20124
EU: November 30, 2012
AU: November 30, 2012
Microsoft Windows
NA: November 20, 2012
AU: November 22, 2012
EU: November 23, 2012
PlayStation 4  Xbox One
WW: March 2019
GenresActionadventure, stealth5
ModesSingleplayer, multiplayer
Assassins Creed III is a 2012 actionadventure video game developed by Ubisoft Montreal and published by Ubisoft for PlayStation 3, Xbox 360, Wii U, and Microsoft Windows. It is the fifth major installment in the Assassins Creed series, and a direct sequel to 2011s Assassins Creed: Revelations. The game was released worldwide for PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360, beginning in North America on October 30, 2012, with a Wii U and Microsoft Windows release following in November 2012. A remastered version will be released for PC, PlayStation 4 and Xbox One in March 2019.6

The plot is set in a fictional history of real world events and follows the centuriesold struggle between the Assassins, who fight for peace with free will, and the Templars, who desire peace through control. The framing story is set in the 21st century and features series protagonist Desmond Miles who, with the aid of a machine known as the Animus, relives the memories of his ancestors to find a way to avert the 2012 apocalypse. The story is set in the 18th century, before, during and after the American Revolution from 1754 to 1783, and follows Desmonds halfEnglish, halfMohawk ancestor, Ratonhnhak:ton, also known as Connor, as he fights the Templars attempts to gain control in the colonies.

Assassins Creed III is set in an open world and presented from the thirdperson perspective with a primary focus on using Desmond and Connors combat and stealth abilities to eliminate targets and explore the environment. Connor is able to freely explore 18thcentury Boston, New York City, and the American frontier to complete side missions away from the primary storyline. The game also features a multiplayer component, allowing players to compete online to complete solo and team based objectives including assassinations and evading pursuers. Ubisoft developed a new game engine, Anvil Next, for the game.7

The game received positive reviews from critics, who praised it for its gameplay, narrative, diverse cast of characters, visuals and grand, ambitious scale, while criticism was directed at the unevenly developed gameplay mechanics and the glitches within the game. It was a massive commercial success, selling more than 12 million copies worldwide. Its sequel, Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag, was released in October 2013, and follows Ratonhnhak:tons grandfather  Edward Kenway  a pirate and Assassin operating in the Caribbean during the Golden Age of Piracy.8

In September 2018, a remastered edition of Assassins Creed III was announced as a downloadable addon to Assassins Creed Odyssey.9


Contents
1Gameplay
2Synopsis
2.1Setting
2.2Characters
2.3Plot
3Development
3.1Origins
3.2Preannouncement
3.2.1Internal leaks
3.3Postannouncement
4Music
5Marketing
5.1Allegations of proAmerican and antiBritish prejudice
5.2Retail editions
6Downloadable content
6.1Uplay content
6.2The Hidden Secrets Pack
6.3The Battle Hardened Pack
6.4The Tyranny of King Washington
7Reception
7.1Awards
7.2Sales
7.3Technical issues
8Series continuation
9References
10External links
Gameplay
Main article: Gameplay in the Assassins Creed series

Assassins Creed III features new gameplay elements such as hunting and dual wielding of weaponry. Here the protagonist Connor uses two weapons, a tomahawk and a flintlock pistol, against a group of redcoats.
Assassins Creed III is a thirdperson actionadventure title set in an open world in which the player uses a combination of stealth, parkour, and combat to complete various missions. The player takes the role of three characters during the course of the game. The main character is Desmond Miles, a 21stcentury Assassin, working to uncover the secrets of a mysterious Precursor Vault that will protect the Earth from an upcoming solar flare on December 21, 2012. To uncover the secrets, Desmond uses the Animus to live out memories of two of his ancestors which the player controls during these sequences, both set at the time of the American Revolutionary War. The first, briefly played at the start of the game, is Haytham Kenway, a British Templar who seeks the location of the Vault. The second, and the primary character for the game, is Ratonhnhak:ton, the result of a brief liaison between Kenway and a Native American woman. Ratonhnhak:ton takes on the name Connor to blend in better with colonial society. When playing as Connor, the player has access to a huge wilderness known as the Frontier which is 1.5 times bigger than Rome in Assassins Creed: Brotherhood, the cities of Boston and New York City. Portions of the Eastern Seaboard and Caribbean Sea can be explored via the flagship of the Assassins navy, the Aquila, captained by Connor Kenway himself, with Robert Faulkner his firstmate advising and teaching him in the ways of the sea.

Free running has been simplified to allow for more fluid parkour in the cities and wilderness, such as climbing and running on trees, mountains, cliffs, etc. Close combat has been modified, allowing Connor to dualwield weapons and take down multiple opponents at once and players no longer need to manage the lockon mechanic. Aiding this, Connor has access to a wide range of weapons which include muskets, swords, pistols, native weapons such as the tomahawk and bow and arrow, a rope dart used to pull foes or hang them, while on a tree as well as the Hidden Blades. In addition, the left Hidden Blade has a folding mechanism for blocking attacks, skinning an animal, and performing highprofile assassinations. Human shields can be used against firing lines of enemies. Medicine is no longer used as health recovers automatically. Stealth is also revamped, allowing players to use natural elements such as tall grass and trees to hide, along with the ability to blend between any two people.

Assassins Creed III features new weather simulations such as snow, fog, and rain. The seasons can also change i.e., Summer and Winter, which not only affect visuals but also gameplay, as the player will find that they run slower in deep snow. Snowfall can reduce visibility for the player and enemies, aiding stealth. Unlike the past games, this one includes animals varying from domestic horses, cows, dogs to wild deer, wolves, bears. The wild ones are found in the Frontier, and can be hunted for meat or marrow in order to be sold. The quality of the kill determines the price, encouraging the player to hunt silently. For this, traps and bait can also be used.

Economy is now based on the Davenport Homestead, which also acts as Connors adoptive home. The site can be visited by people such as carpenters, tailors etc. suffering from displacement due to the war. Helping and interacting with these nonplayer characters NPCs will encourage them to settle in the Homestead. From there on, the player can craft various items and trade with them, and then sell the goods to the cities via caravan. The player can also help them build relationships with each other, which will then result in the formation of a small village. The player can also upgrade the Homestead manor as well as Connors ship, the Aquila.

A revamped version of Assassins Creed: Brotherhoods recruitment feature returns as players can enlist citizens to the Assassins cause by completing Liberation missions. They also have a much larger skill set, which allows them to start a riot, provide a covert escort, act as a personal bodyguard etc. Other side missions include collecting Almanac pages, exploring underground tunnels to locate fasttravel stations, joining hunting and fighting clubs, investigating frontiersman rumors about UFOs and Sasquatch, pegleg missions in which Connor goes to underground forts and wastelands to uncover the legend of Captain Kidds treasure, and others.

Assassins Creed III also features naval expeditions. Using Connors warship, the Aquila, the player can navigate the high seas. Control of the ship relies on environmental factors such as wind direction and speed, local presence of storms, high waves, and rocks. Engagements are by cannon, with broadsides covering both flanks of the ship, swivel guns that can be used to damage smaller ships which can also be boarded to find treasure, and chain shots from the broadsides as well to take down the masts of larger ships and disable them. The Aquila is used in the side missions known as Privateer missions and is also used in some of the main missions.

The Wii U version of the game has extra features. The player has the ability to change weapons on the go and the map is always visible on the Wii U Gamepad. The Wii U version also supports Off TV Play. With this feature enabled, the main screen is redirected to the Wii U Gamepad.

Online multiplayer returns in this installment by Ubisoft Annecy.10 Along with returning modes, new ones feature a cooperative mode named Wolfpack, in which 14 players are charged with killing certain NPCs within a time limit, through a sequence of 25 stages. It also features Domination, a team mode where players will have to capture certain areas of the map, protecting them from the opposing team.

Synopsis
Setting
Following the events of Assassins Creed: Revelations, the game explores the life of an 18thcentury assassin in Colonial America during the American Revolution; a halfEnglish, halfMohawk man named Ratonhnhak:ton, also known as Connor,11 whose father is Grand Master of the Templar Order in the colonies. Connor is caught up in the Assassins conflict with the Templar order when his Native American village is attacked by the Templars, who intend to seize control of the newly forming country.

Connors story spans through two decades of his life. From his childhood in 1760 to 1783.12 Boston and New York City are cities that can be explored,13 as well as the American Colonial Frontier, spanning forest, cliffs, rivers, Connors Mohawk village, and the settlements of Lexington, and Concord. The player can hunt small and large animals, and approximately one third of the story takes place in the Frontier.14 The city of Philadelphia can also be visited at one point during the game, as can The Caribbean during several naval missions.15 The entire Eastern seaboard is also explorable via Connors captaining his naval warship, the Aquila.16

Characters
Assassins Creed III features a large cast of characters. The main character is Ratonhnhak:ton Noah Watts, also known as Connor, an 18thcentury assassin.17

The 18th century characters include Achilles Davenport Roger Aaron Brown, Connors mentor and a retired assassin;18 Connors mother Kanieht:io or Ziio Kaniehtiio Horn;19 Connors first mate aboard the Aquila Robert Faulkner Kevin McNally;20 and the French taverner Stephane Chapheau Shawn Baichoo.21 The Colonial Templars are led by Connors father, the English nobleman Haytham Kenway Adrian Hough.22 He is aided by several historical figures who are portrayed as members of the Templar order including Charles Lee Neil Napier,23 Thomas Hickey Allen Leech,24 John Pitcairn Robert Lawrenson, Benjamin Church Harry Standjofski, William Johnson Julian Casey, and Nicholas Biddle. The era also features several other historical figures such as Israel Putnam Andreas Apergis, George Washington Robin Atkin Downes, Thomas Jefferson John Emmet Tracy, Mason Weems Tod Fennell, Paul Revere Bruce Dinsmore, Edward Braddock, Benjamin Franklin Rick Jones, and Samuel Adams Mark Lindsay Chapman.

Other characters include Minerva Margaret Easley and Juno Nadia Verrucci, members of Those Who Came Before; and the Grand Master of the 18th century Templar Order in England, Reginald Birch Gideon Emery.

Plot
Immediately after the events of the previous game, Desmond Miles, his father William, with allies Rebecca Crane and Shaun Hastings find the Temple of the First Civilization in a cave in New York and access it using their Apple of Eden, an ancient artifact of immense power. After partially activating the temple, Juno uses it to communicate with Desmond. Desmond is placed in the Animus where Junos influence causes him to experience the life of his ancestor Haytham Kenway in 1754 century England.

Haytham assassinates a patron at the Royal Opera House and steals a medallion; the Key to the Temples inner chamber. Haytham is dispatched to the American Colonies to locate the Temple. While in Boston, he kills a slave trader, freeing a group of Mohawks including a woman named Kaniehti:io, who asks Haytham to refer to her as Ziio after he proves unable to pronounce her full name. She helps Haytham find the Temple in exchange for him killing General Braddock. Haytham and Ziio find that the Key is not able to open the temple itself. The pair develop a romantic relationship during their time together, which results in a son, Ratonhnhak:ton. Haytham is then seen inducting a new member, Charles Lee into the Order, only for it to be shown to actually be the Templar Order instead of the Assassins.

The perspective then shifts to Ratonhnhak:tons childhood in 1760. His mother dies during an attack on his village which Ratonhnhak:ton believes was led by the Templar Charles Lee. Years later, the village Elder informs a teenage Ratonhnhak:ton that their tribes duty is to prevent the Temples discovery. The Elder gives him a transparent Sphere which allows Juno to communicate with him; she tells him of his importance and shows him the Assassins symbol. The symbol leads him to the retired Assassin Achilles Davenport, who reluctantly begins training him as an assassin.

Achilles suggests Ratonhnhak:ton rename himself Connor to enable him to move more freely throughout the Colonies, in fear that some colonists might reject him as a tribe member. While seeking supplies in Boston, Connor is framed by the Templars for instigating the Boston Massacre. Over the following years, Connor kills several Templars, and aids in the Revolutionary War between the Patriots and the British. Connor meets with his father, and the two forge a temporary alliance to eliminate a rogue Templar. Later, Haytham uncovers a letter detailing George Washingtons plan to remove the Indigenous population, including Connors tribe, from the frontier to prevent them supporting the Loyalists. Connor returns to his village and learns that Lee has recruited several Mohawk warriors to turn back the Patriots sent to eradicate them. Connor neutralizes the warriors to avoid conflict, but his childhood friend Kanent:kon cannot be reasoned with and Connor is forced to kill him.

Meanwhile, Desmond is occasionally roused from the Animus to retrieve power cells from Manhattan and Brazil, necessary for activating the Temple, before the Templar Daniel Cross can take them. William goes after the final cell himself, but is captured by the Templars modern day front, Abstergo Industries. Desmond assaults the facility, kills Cross and Warren Vidic, and rescues his father.

Connor becomes conflicted about eliminating the Templars, and hopes to work with Haytham towards a common vision of peace and freedom. However, Haytham remains convinced of the chaos of freedom and the necessity to control the nation by replacing Washington with Lee. Lee is disgraced by Washington for attempting to sabotage the outcome of the Battle of Monmouth and takes refuge in the heavily fortified Fort George. Connor infiltrates the fort and is confronted by Haytham; they duel, and Connor kills him. Connor later kills Lee and recovers the Key. With the Colonial Templars eliminated, Connor returns to his village only to find it empty, and the Sphere left behind. Using it, Juno instructs him to conceal the Key where it cannot be found; Connor buries the Key in the grave of Achilles son, Connor Davenport.

In 2012, Desmond retrieves the Key and accesses the Temples inner chambers. Juno informs him that activating the pedestal will save the world, but at the cost of his life. Minerva appears before them, opposing the plan as it will free Juno, who was sealed away in the temple to prevent her conquering humanity. Juno and Minerva explain that if the solar flare occurs, Desmond will be one of the few survivors in a postapocalyptic world. After Desmonds later death, he will become revered as a god, whose wellintended legacy will be manipulated to control future generations, restarting the cycle. Desmond chooses to sacrifice himself in order to save humanity and give them the opportunity to fight Juno rather than be destroyed. William, Shaun, and Rebecca leave the temple as Desmond activates the pedestal; a global aurora protects the planet from the solar eruption. Juno commends Desmonds choice and declares that it is time for her part to begin.

In an epilogue, Connor takes down the Templar portraits in the Davenport Manors basement and burns them, signifying the end of his journey. In addition, his return to his village is detailed further, showing he spoke to a hunter there, who revealed that the land had been sold to settlers in order to settle the new United States governments war debts. Connor also travels to the pier in New York, where he witnesses the last of the British Regulars leave America for good. However, he also sees evidence of the slave trade present in the newly formed nation, right next to the pier of citizens cheering at the departure of the British, learning that not all people have been freed.

Following this, a modernday voiceover can be heard directing the player to locate a number of pivot points that have been spread out across the memories graphical representation of Colonial America. Once collected, the voiceover returns to congratulate, and informs that they have now connected to the cloud.

Development
Origins
Work on Assassins Creed III began in January 2010 almost immediately after the release of Assassins Creed II by a senior team of Ubisoft developers.12 The title was in development for two and a half years and had the longest development cycle since the first Assassins Creed.2526 When Ubisoft first revealed Assassins Creed: Brotherhood in 2010, as new details came to light, there was some confusion within the gaming community as to whether this would be Assassins Creed III. According to the developers, Brotherhood was not Assassins Creed III, and the third installment would not star a preexisting character.2728 Ubisoft Montreals developers stated in their interviews that Assassins Creed III would be released eventually.

JeanFranois Boivin of Ubisoft also stated that each numbered title in the series will introduce a new lead character and a new setting.29 Patrice Dsilets, former series creative director, said that the series has always been planned as a trilogy. He also commented on the story of Assassins Creed III, saying that it would focus on Assassins quest to prevent the end of the world in 2012, and their race against time to find temples and Apples of Eden built by Those Who Came Before. Desmond would be searching for clues as to the locations of these temples, by exploring memories of one or more of his other ancestors.30

In October 2011 Alexandre Amacio, creative director of Assassins Creed: Revelations, announced that the next installment of the franchise was to be released before December 2012, however, Amacio himself would not be directing the game.31 This comes from the idea that Desmond Miles, the modern day protagonist of the series, was to finish his tale by December 2012. Amacio said that gamers should not have to play a futuristic game after the time period in which it is set.32

Preannouncement
Ubisoft CEO Yves Guillemot confirmed during an earnings call on November 8, 2011, that a new major Assassins Creed game would be released in 2012. Guillemot refused to go into any further detail on the title beyond its confirmation.33 Speaking to MCV, Guillemot dismissed the notion that annual Assassins Creed installments are diluting the brands, stating instead that theyre necessary to satisfy the demand. Guillemot also claimed in the same interview that this years Assassins Creed will be the series biggest to date.34

In February 2012, Ubisoft officially confirmed the existence of Assassins Creed III, and its North American release date of October 30, 2012.35 Guillemot described Assassins Creed III as the true next generation of both the Assassins Creed brand and interactive entertainmentstorytelling in general. We will push the title a lot because its a fantastic product that the team has been working on for three years. What we have seen is just fabulous.3536 Guillemot went on to say the publishers investing more heavily in the game than in any other title in the series.36

Internal leaks

An early screenshot of Assassins Creed III showed Connor paddling a canoe. However, the feature was removed from the final version.
Reports that Assassins Creed III would take place during the American Revolution surfaced following a supposed inside source at Ubisoft, who made such a claim in January 2012.37 On February 29, 2012, an upcoming promotional image of the game was sent to Kotaku by a Best Buy employee, along with information from the retailer that a full reveal was imminent.38 The leaked promotional image led to a general consensus that the game was set in North America during the American Revolution, and at least in part, a snowy setting.citation needed Around the same time, Ubisoft mentioned a major announcement from Assassins Creed was only days away via the series official Facebook. The pages cover photo also depicted a snowy and bleak setting.38 Furthermore, Game Informer appeared ready to confirm the fresh details via an advertising banner posted on its site. Images showed the new assassin standing next to American revolutionary leader George Washington.38

Following the reports, Ubisoft released Assassins Creed IIIs official box art on March 1, 2012, which confirmed the games American Revolution setting.39 The company said it will announce all the details at 5pm on March 5.40 Additionally, Game Informer revealed its latest cover feature, which included more artwork of the games new main character.41 On March 2, several screenshots were leaked ahead of Ubisofts official reveal, and the first gameplay details emerged via Game Informer.42

Postannouncement
Assassins Creed III was unveiled with a cinematic trailer on March 5, 2012. Ubisoft described the game as the most ambitious project in the companys history, with twice the production capacity of any previous title from the publisher. The games engine, AnvilNext, delivers improved visuals, character models and AI, allowing for battlefields full of fighters.2 Ubisoft later said its aiming to make Assassins Creed III look nextgen on currentgen consoles using the new AnvilNext engine.43

Ubisoft said that when Rockstars Red Dead Redemption released midway through Assassins Creed IIIs development, it was surprised to see Rockstar had included wild animal hunting and a giant frontier to explorefeatures both planned for its own sequel. Lead writer Corey May said Ubisofts now looking at Red Deads success and trying to take the formula in new directions. Similarities between these two games are down to a convergence of minds, said Assassins Creed III writer Matt Turner.44 Creative Director Alex Hutchinson said Ubisoft steered clear of making the Assassins Creed III protagonist a female character because the games setting is not a strong match. Hutchinson said while many people wanted to see female assassins in the series, the American Revolution setting makes it difficult this time round.45

Ubisoft recommends the PC version of the game to be played with a controller even though it will still support keyboard and mouse setup. Ubisoft Montreals creative director Alex Hutchinson admitted: Were definitely supporting PC, we love PC, but I think itll be PC with a controller. I dont see us investing hugely in a mouse and keyboard setup. I think if you want to play on PC and you want to play Assassins Creed, you have a controller.46

Music
The score to Assassins Creed III was composed by Scottish composer Lorne Balfe,47 who previously cocomposed the soundtrack of Assassins Creed: Revelations with longtime Assassins Creed series composer, Jesper Kyd.48 The games soundtrack is the first soundtrack of the series main games to not feature Jesper Kyd. The soundtrack was released via digital download on October 30, 2012.49 Balfe also composed the music within the DLC content, The Tyranny of King Washington, with the soundtrack released via digital distribution on April 23, 2013.50

The game also features additional compositions by Max Aruj, Dave Fleming, Andrew Kawczynski, Jasha Klebe, and Steve Mazzaro.

Assassins Creed III Original Game Soundtrack
Assassins Creed III: The Tyranny of King Washington Original Game Soundtrack
Marketing

Ubisoft Australia put together a very special, very limited edition of Assassins Creed III to auction off in benefit of the Sydney Childrens Hospital Foundation. There are only ten of these editions in the world, and eight of them were auctioned off to raise money for the Sydney Childrens Hospital in Randwick.
Ubisofts senior vice president of sales and marketing, Tony Key, said the game would enjoy the biggest marketing commitment in company history.51 Ubisoft UK MD Rob Cooper has said that Assassins Creed III is a good entry point for newcomers to the series, and that he thinks Assassins Creed III will hold its own against this years biggest releases.52 In March 2012, the Assassins Creed: Double Pack was released both as a retail purchase for PlayStation 3, Xbox 360 and for download on PSN, which brings together the first Assassins Creed and Assassins Creed II in a virtual compilation box.5354

Ubisoft has collaborated with several retail outlets on preorder bonuses available through several store chains throughout the world. Which of the preorder bonuses the player received depended upon where they preordered the game. A free SteelBook collectible featuring artwork by renowned comic book artist Alex Ross is available as a preorder incentive.citation needed The Captain of the Aquila DLC pack includes a single player weapon The Pirate Boarding Axe and a single player skin The Captain of the Aquilas uniform.citation needed The Colonial Assassin DLC pack includes a single player weapon The Scottish Flintlock and a single player skin the Traditional Colonial Assassins outfit.55 Redcoat Multiplayer DLC pack includes redcoat costume, a snake emblem, and a doctor doll relic.citation needed In the US, Gamestop is offering the singleplayer mission Lost Mayan Ruins and the Sawtooth Sword, Best Buy is offering the singleplayer mission Ghost of War and the Pontiacs War Club, while Amazon is offering the Steelbook Case.citation needed

SCEE offers a digital version of Assassins Creed III via the PlayStation Store. Dubbed the Gold Edition, the download includes the game, PlayStation Vita title Assassins Creed III: Liberation and a Season Pass a first for the series. Another version of the Gold Edition features the game and the Season Pass, but not Liberation. Third version comes with Liberation, but without the Season Pass. All versions include A Dangerous Secret, the extra mission available with the Special Edition.56

Dutch site Entertainment Business reported that thieves made off with a truck on November 14, 2012, in transporting the entire launch shipment of Assassins Creed III on PC for Belgium, the Netherlands and Luxembourg. Ubisoft stated that it wont affect launch as copies will be sourced elsewhere. Those who preordered the Join or Die edition, however, were affected as allegedly this cannot be remanufactured. Ubisoft also passed on serial numbers and barcodes to retailers of the stolen games, and placed the same numbers on a blacklist preventing them from receiving online authentication.5758

American global technology company Nvidia bundled the PC version of Assassins Creed III with its new GeForce GTX 650 Ti. It is built on the Kepler architecture along with others in the Nvidias 600 series of GPUs.59 According to Nvidia, Assassins Creed III makes the most of the TXAA technology.60 Ubisoft Australia put together a very special, very limited edition of Assassins Creed III to auction off in benefit of the Sydney Childrens Hospital Foundation. There are only ten of these editions in the world, and eight of them will be auctioned off to raise money for the Sydney Childrens Hospital in Randwick. Each will be auctioned separately between November 30, 2012 and December 17.61

Allegations of proAmerican and antiBritish prejudice
In June 2012 Ubisoft and in particular its FrenchCanadian subsidiary Ubisoft Montreal had to fend off increasing accusations of antiBritish prejudice after trailers and box art depicting the killing of British Redcoats started to appear.62 One site described the July 4 liveaction trailer as American nationalism.63 Lead script writer Corey May defended the developers and publisher Ubisoft from allegations of bigotry and discrimination.64 This controversy, however, continued because marketing materials continued to depict only the British as the enemy,65 with a number of gaming news outlets noting US trailers cutting scenes that did seem to depict the protagonist killing Patriots.666768 The publisher eventually decided that the Limited Edition of the game wouldnt be sold in the UK or Europe.69

However upon the games release, critics said their depiction was balanced and fair. Official Xbox Magazine UK felt that the strongest aspect of ACIII is the more mature moral tone  theres none of the anticipated yay, America.70 In another review by Kotaku, the reviewer notes publishers from big video game companies are not known for subtlety or complexity of theme, going on to say the marketing always suggested that Assassins Creed IIIs igniting of the Revolution would be a game of interactive jingoism; its developers always said it was not. The developers were the ones being accurate.7172

Retail editions
On March 26, 2012, Ubisoft announced three collectors editions of Assassins Creed III, The Freedom, Join Or Die and Special editions, exclusive to EMEA countries and Australia. On June 1, 2012, Ubisoft also announced another collectors edition of Assassins Creed III, the UbiWorkshop Edition. Ubisoft and Sony partnered to offer the game as a bundle with the PlayStation 3 console, which was offered from the day of the games release.73 On the day of its release, Assassins Creed III on the PlayStation 3 received four exclusive singleplayer missions, titled The Benedict Arnold Missions. The gameplay revolves around Benedict Arnold and his connections with turning West Point over to the British. Script writer Matt Turner stated that the Benedict Arnold missions were some of the most historically accurate missions in the game, as some scenes have the actual words spoken by key players in the events at West Point, according to the records from the court proceedings following what happened.74

The Freedom Edition features a retail copy of the game, a steelbook case with cover art drawn by comic artist Alex Ross, George Washingtons notebook, a 24 cm figurine of the protagonist Connor and two exclusive lithographs.75 Ingame content included is two exclusive single player missions Ghost of War and Lost Mayan Ruins and an additional multiplayer character Sharpshooter.76
The Join Or Die Edition features a retail copy of the game, Connors medallion the medallion of the Assassins with its curd ladle and George Washingtons notebook. Ingame content included is one exclusive single player mission Ghost of War and an additional multiplayer character Sharpshooter.76
The Special Edition features a retail copy of the game and special packaging. Ingame content included is one exclusive singleplayer mission A Dangerous Secret.76
The UbiWorkshop Edition features a retail copy of the game, the second edition of the Assassins Creed Encyclopedia, exclusive packaging, five rare prints, and a new graphic novel titled Assassins Creed: Subject 4.
The Limited Edition features a retail copy of the game, a 24 cm figurine of Connor, an embroidered 28 x 48 Assassins Creedinspired Colonial flag, a 3 x 3.25 metal belt buckle with the Assassin insignia and George Washingtons notebook. Ingame content included is an exclusive single player mission Lost Mayan Ruins.77 This edition is not available in the UK or Europe due to perceived antiBritish sentiment portrayed in the content.78
The Digital Deluxe Edition features a retail copy of the game, George Washingtons notebook and the official Assassins Creed III soundtrack. Ingame content included is three exclusive single player missions, two skins The Captain of the Aquilas uniform and The Colonial Assassin outfit and two additional multiplayer characters Sharpshooter and Redcoat. It also includes the Benedict Arnold DLC previously exclusive only to the PS3. The edition is exclusive to PC.79
Washington Edition includes: all 3 parts of DLC The Tyranny of King Washington, The Hidden Secrets Pack and The Battle Hardened Pack.808182 It was released 20 June 2013.83
Downloadable content
On October 3, 2012 Ubisoft officially revealed a Season Pass for downloadable content DLC, made available for a sixmonth time period on PlayStation Network and on Xbox Live. The pass gives purchasers access to the three King Washington DLC packs, The Hidden Secrets pack with all the preorder, retailer exclusive, bonus material, and The Battle Hardened pack, featuring new maps and characters for multiplayer. Furthermore, players with the pass will have access to DLC a week before other gamers.84

Uplay content
Ubisofts Uplay system enables further ingame enhancements which can be redeemed by points that are given when playing the game. The available awards are an Assassins Creed III Theme available for the PlayStation 3, Xbox 360 and PC, The Life Scratcher Pack, which allows the player to increase the capacity of Connors tool pouches, and unlock exclusive multiplayer profile items, Ezios Outfit, an outfit similar to the one worn by Ezio Auditore in Assassins Creed: Brotherhood, but with a differently colored cape, and The Renegade Pack, which unlocks the Multiplayer Night Stalkers costume and additional profile items.85

The Hidden Secrets Pack
On December 4, 2012, The Hidden Secrets Pack was released for Season Pass players on the PlayStation 3, Xbox 360 and PC, with all gamers getting the pack December 11, 2012 and Wii U86 players getting the pack on January 17, 2013. The pack includes three missions The Lost Mayan Ruins, The Ghost of War and A Dangerous Secret, which unlock the Sawtooth Cutlass, Pontiac War Club, and Flintlock Musket respectively, two singleplayer costumes the Captain of the Aquila and the Colonial Assassin, and two multiplayer characters the Redcoat and the Sharpshooter. All of the content was previously available as preorder bonuses through different retailers, or in different editions of the game.87

The Battle Hardened Pack
Announced on December 4, 2012 with The Hidden Secrets Pack, The Battle Hardened Pack includes new maps and characters for multiplayer.88 On January 8, 2013, The Battle Hardened Pack was released to all players on the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360, with a PC release on January 15 and Wii U release on January 17.86 The pack includes the Governor, Highlander and Coyote Man multiplayer characters and the Charlestown, Fort StMathieu and Saint Pierre maps.89

The Tyranny of King Washington
On October 3, 2012 Ubisoft revealed the first portion of DLC for the game, called The Tyranny of King Washington. The story revolves around an alternative history The United Kingdom of America, wherein George Washington has seized an Apple of Eden, becomes corrupted by its power, and dubs himself King. The player is tasked with overthrowing the dictator. The singleplayer campaign is separated into 3 episodic installments.84 In the DLC, Ratonhnhak:ton gains new abilities: the Power of the Bear for strength, the Power of the Eagle for speed, the Power of the Wolf for stealth, Warpaint to enhance the abilities, and Alpha of the Pack, giving the ability to call wolves to help in battle.90

On January 24, 2013, the first episode of the DLC was announced, titled The Infamy. Set in 1783, Ratonhnhak:ton awakens from what appears to be an alternative reality where the events of the main game involving him have never happened. He is tasked to find George Washington, corrupted heavily by the Apple of Eden. Washington has crowned himself King and begun to enslave and massacre the Frontiers population. Ratonhnhak:ton must do everything in his power to dethrone him to return the land to freedom, including utilizing the new abilities granted to him. The first episode was released on February 19 for Xbox 360 and PC, February 20 for PlayStation 3, and on February 21 for the Wii U.91

On February 6, 2013, it was announced that the second episode, titled The Betrayal, would be released on March 19 for Xbox 360, PC and PlayStation 3 and an unknown date for Wii U available in the eShop as of March 27 and that the third episode, titled The Redemption, would be released on April 23 for Xbox 360, PC and PlayStation 3. Despite being given a release date of May 16 for Wii U, The Redemption has been available in the eShop since April 27.92

Reception
Reception
Aggregate scores
AggregatorScore
GameRankingsPS3 85.5693
X360 84.9294
WIIU 83.0095
PC 80.7596
MetacriticPS3 8510097
WIIU 8510098
X360 8410099
PC 80100100
Review scores
PublicationScore
Edge810101
Eurogamer910102
G455103
Game Informer9.510104
GameSpot8.510105
GamesRadar45 stars106
GameTrailers9.210107
IGN8.510108
Joystiq3.55 stars109
OPM UK710110
OXM US8.510111
Assassins Creed III received positive reviews, with critics praising the visuals, narrative, combat style, hunting mechanics, naval missions and Homestead system, while complaining about the games glitches and some of the missions prescriptive layouts. Aggregating review websites GameRankings and Metacritic gave the PlayStation 3 version 85.56 and 85100,9397 the Xbox 360 version 84.92 and 84100,9499 the Wii U version 83.00 and 85100,9598 and the PC version 80.75 and 80100.96100

Daniel Bischoff of GameRevolution gave it 55 stars, saying Combining the best of the franchise so far, ASSASSINS CREED III doesnt disappoint longtime fans whove been with the series while also making it easy enough to jump in for the kill.112

IGN gave the game a score of 8.510, saying It achieves so much that you cant help but respect it, no other open world game has ever given us a setting thats as impressive to observe or as full of things to do as this. They did however say Not everything about the game gels together convincingly and the missions unnecessary prescriptiveness sometimes undermines the sense of freedom that the rest of the game works so hard to create.108 GameSpot gave a similar review, stating It takes chances with its opening, with its story, and with its characters. It expands the series gameplay in enjoyable and sensible ways. As with many ambitious games, not every arrow fired hits the bulls eye, yet this big, narratively rich sequel is easy to get invested in and gave a score of 8.510.105 Game Informer awarded the game 9.510, saying Assassins Creed III delivers everything the series has promised, and throws in a little more for good measure ... Most players will likely spend the first six hours of Assassins Creed III wrapping their heads around the profound size and ambition of the game.104

G4 felt that Assassins Creed III was not perfect ... But there is so much story, so much multiplayer, and so much stuff to do that your average 10 hour game should be terribly ashamed of itself.103 Official Xbox Magazine gave it 8.510, and said Its newly refined gameplay and incredibly rich setting are captivating stuff ... It improves on the underlying Assassins Creed formula in a handful of subtle but tangible ways ... And its unwavering commitment to storytelling is both rare and impressive. They did however criticize, Pacing problems which can drag the campaign into busywork tedium.111 PC Gamer was more critical, giving the game a 72100 and stating that Assassins Creed III had Entertaining storytelling and fantastic naval combat marred by terrible mission design and endemic feature creep113 The reviewer felt that homesteading detracted from the central theme and story, and narrowly scripted optional objectives punished players for thinking laterally. Its about pattern recognition rather than creative thought, binary reactions with no room for life or dynamism.

In December 2015, Game Informer ranked the game as the ninth best game in the Assassins Creed series to date.114

Awards
Assassins Creed III was nominated for six awards in the 2012 Spike Video Game Awards: Game of the Year, Best Xbox 360 Game, Best PS3 Game, Best Action Adventure Game, Best Graphics, and Character of the Year Connor.115 GameTrailers awarded Assassins Creed 3 Best ActionAdventure Game of the Year 2012 while Game Revolution named Assassins Creed III its Game of the Year 2012. For the 2013 D.I.C.E. Interactive Achievement Awards, the game won the award for Outstanding Achievement in Animation and was nominated for Adventure Game of the Year, and Outstanding Achievement in Sound Design.116117 Assassins Creed III also received four Game Developers Choice Awards nominations for Best Audio, Best Narrative, Best Technology, and Game of the Year.118

List of awards and nominations for Assassins Creed III
Sales
On March 30, 2012, Ubisoft stated that in the three weeks since the games preorder campaign began, numbers had already surpassed the total U.S. preorder numbers of Assassins Creed: Brotherhood and exceeded 10 times more than the preorders Assassins Creed: Revelations attracted in a comparable time frame.51 On October 25, 2012, Ubisoft announced that the game is the most preordered game in the companys history, more than doubling preorders for Revelations, the previous record holder.126

Assassins Creed III was the bestselling game in the United Kingdom in the week of its release, with the best sales of the series to date. It was the biggest launch in publisher Ubisofts history and the third biggest launch of any game in the UK in 2012 behind Call of Duty: Black Ops II and FIFA 13. It doubled the launch week sales of Assassins Creed II, and beat 2011s Revelations by over 117,000 copies.127128 According to Ubisoft, Assassins Creed III sold over 3.5 million units in its first week, which represents a 100 percent yearoveryear increase from Revelations.129 On December 12, 2012, Ubisoft announced that the game had sold 7 million copies worldwide.130 In the United Kingdom, Assassins Creed III was the 3rd bestselling title of 2012, after being on sale for 2 months.131 According to the NPD Group, the game was the 4th bestselling game of 2012 in North America.132 On February 7, 2013, Ubisoft announced that the game had sold 12 million copies worldwide, representing an almost 70 percent increase over Revelations at the same point of its lifecycle, and making it the bestselling game in the franchise.133

Technical issues
On November 14, 2012, Ubisoft reassured that the PC version of Assassins Creed III will launch with fewer bugs than the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 versions. A new patch was in the works to fix glitches on all versions. It was the second title update for the game following a large patch available dayone. The PC launch came with both of these patches included.134 After two days, Ubisoft detailed the sizable patch scheduled for release across the major platforms. This extensive patch was designed to address a list of around one hundred identified bugs present within the singleplayer campaign and online multiplayer modes plaguing the player experience. Some of the problems outlined involve substantial environmental instability, severe NPC technical issues, occasional console crashes and various issues involving sound synchronization amongst others.135

Series continuation
Main article: Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag
Assassins Creed is all about cycles  we have the Ezio cycle and the Altair cycle, and both of those are set to conclude in Revelations and we have the Desmond cycle, which is set to end on December 2012. But theres many cycles within the brand  thats the whole point. History is our playground.
 Alexandre Amancio, game director of Assassins Creed: Revelations, in October 2011136
In September 2012, franchise main writer Corey May stated that the Assassins Creed III plot leaves possible sequels plenty of room to play.137 Assassins Creed III associate producer Julien Laferrire said that further Assassins Creed games featuring new hero Connor depend on reaction to character, stating We made three games with Ezio because people loved Ezio.138 In November 2012, The Gaming Liberty spotted a supposed Ubisoft survey that suggested another annual installment could be set for release next year. The survey asked participants how they would feel about a return of Desmond, Connor and the American Revolution setting, and if they would purchase such a title if it were to be released next year, suggesting that Ubisoft had its eye on repeating the Brotherhood and Revelations route of the Ezio trilogy. The survey was also said to ask how participants would feel about the introduction of a coop mode, and how they feel about Naughty Dogs Uncharted 3: Drakes Deception, possibly suggesting a move to more scripted gameplay.139140

On February 28, 2013, Ubisoft posted their first promotional picture and cover for their next Assassins Creed game, following leaked marketing material days before.141 Titled Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag, it serves as a sequel to Assassins Creed IIIs modern story and a prequel to its ancestral storyline. The game is set in the Caribbean islands during the Golden Age of Piracy, and centers around Edward Kenway; the father of Haytham Kenway, and grandfather of Ratonhnhak:ton, the playable characters of Assassins Creed III.

References
 Goldfarb, Andrew March 5, 2012. Assassins Creed III Confirmed for Wii U. IGN. Ziff Davis, LLC. Retrieved March 5, 2012.
 Ivan, Tom March 5, 2013. Assassins Creed 3 gets first trailer, Ubisoft talks up revolutionary new game engine. Computer and Video Games. Future Publishing Limited. Archived from the original on December 16, 2012. Retrieved March 5, 2012.
 Gilbert, Henry March 5, 2012. Assassins Creed III release date and more in first trailer. GamesRadar. Future Publishing Limited. Retrieved March 5, 2012.
 Molina, Brett September 26, 2012. Nintendo: 23 games launching with Wii U console. USA Today. Gannett Co. Inc. Retrieved September 30, 2012.
 Stevenson, Alastair 30 October 2012. Assassins Creed 3 review. The Inquirer. Incisive Business Media Limited. p. 4. Retrieved March 2, 2013.
 Rame, Jordan 17 September 2018. Assassins Creed 3 Remastered Is Finally On Its Way. GameSpot. CBS Interactive Inc. Retrieved 26 September 2018.
 Bertz, Matt March 28, 2012. Assassins Creed III: The Redesigned Anvil Engine. Game Informer. Retrieved September 16, 2012.
 Kietzmann, Ludwig February 28, 2013. Assassins Creed 4: Black Flag hoists new hero onto PS3, 360, Wii U, PC. Joystiq. AOL Inc. Archived from the original on April 11, 2013. Retrieved February 28, 2013.
 Knezevic, Kevin 18 September 2018. Assassins Creed Odyssey Season Pass Announced, Includes Remastered Assassins Creed 3 And More. GameSpot. CBS Interactive Inc. Retrieved 26 September 2018.
 Ubisoft Annecy working on Assassins Creed III Multiplayer. VG247. March 19, 2012.
 Harman, Stace March 27, 2012. Connor goes loud: Assassins Creed III gets first showing. VG247. Retrieved June 19, 2012.
 Miller, Matt March 1, 2012. April Cover Revealed: Assassins Creed III. Game Informer. Retrieved March 1, 2012.
 Robinson, Andy March 2, 2012. News: Assassins Creed 3 first details: New hero is Connor, not all English are evil. Computer and Video Games. Retrieved April 7, 2012.
 Miller, Matt April 2012. Liberty and Death: Assassins Creed III. Game Informer 228: 38.
 GameInformer: First Take: Assassins Creed 3 Part I. GameTrailers. October 29, 2012. Retrieved October 6, 2014.
 Miller, Matt June 6, 2012. Eastern Seaboard Is An Entirely New AC III Gameplay Zone. Game Informer. Retrieved June 6, 2012.
 Schreier, Jason 3 May 2012. Heres How To Pronounce The Name of Assassins Creed IIIs Protagonist. Kotaku. Gizmodo Media Group. Retrieved 12 October 2018.
 Dyce, Andrew 30 September 2012. Assassins Creed 3 Images Introduce Key Characters. Game Rant. Retrieved 12 October 2018.
 Whitehead, Thomas 20 February 2013. Assassins Creed IIIs Tyranny of King Washington DLC Goes for the Kill On 21st February. Nintendo Life. Gamer Network. Retrieved 12 October 2018.
 Hartup, Andy; Reed, Ashley 14 November 2014. Assassins Creed  heres EVERY Assassin, ever!. Games Radar. Future Publishing Limited. p. 5. Retrieved 12 October 2018.
 Stephane Chapheau. IGN. Ziff Davis, LLC. 12 December 2012. Retrieved 12 October 2018.
 Schfer, Samantha 28 September 2015. Nothing is True: The Different Functions of Haytham Kenway in the Assassins Creed Kenway Saga Research Masters Thesis PDF. University of Amsterdam: 2536. Retrieved 12 October 2018.
 Hohl, Nathaniel 22 August 2014. The Order of Abstergo: The Rise of the Templars in Assassins Creed. Shacknews. Retrieved 12 October 2018.
 Parijat, Shubhankar 16 November 2002. 7 Reasons Why Assassins Creed 3 Is Actually Disappointing. Gaming Bolt. Retrieved 12 October 2018.
 Assassins Creed 3: Why Starting From Scratch Has Been Worth It  Interview Feature. NowGamer. April 18, 2012. Retrieved July 28, 2012.
 50 Things About Assassins Creed III That You Should Know. Kotaku. March 26, 2012. Retrieved July 28, 2012.
 Assassins Creed: Brotherhood is not Assassins Creed 3.
 Ubisoft: Brotherhood is not Assassins Creed 2.5  Neoseeker News Article. Neoseeker.com. July 20, 2010. Retrieved March 1, 2012.
 Ubisoft reveals first ever details on Assassins Creed 3. Gamerzines.com. June 8, 2010. Archived from the original on August 22, 2010. Retrieved November 17, 2010.
 Assassins Creed 3 will see Desmond Miles become the Ultimate Assassin. Video Games Blogger. June 10, 2009. Retrieved November 17, 2010.
 Assassins Creed: Revelations Creative Director Quits Ubisoft. GamingUnion.net. January 11, 2012. Retrieved January 11, 2011.
 Pereira, Chris. Expect a Larger Gap Between Future Assassins Creed Releases. 1UP.com.
 Jackson, Mike. New Assassins Creed in 2012, confirms Ubi. Computer and Video Games.
 Robinson, Andy January 26, 2012. Assassins Creed 3 will be series biggest yet  Ubisoft. Computer and Video Games. Retrieved March 1, 2012.
 Reilly, Jim February 15, 2012. Assassins Creed III Coming In October. Game Informer. Retrieved December 27, 2012.
 Ivan, Tom February 15, 2012. Assassins Creed 3 release confirmed for October. Computer and Video Games. Retrieved March 1, 2012.
 Robinson, Andy January 27, 2012. Assassins Creed 3 heads to American Revolution  Rumour. Computer and Video Games. Retrieved March 1, 2012.
 Phillips, Tom. Assassins Creed 3 set in American Revolution  report. Eurogamer. Retrieved March 1, 2012.
 Assassins Creed III Packshots. Ubisoft on Facebook. March 1, 2012. Retrieved March 1, 2012.
 YinPoole, Wesley. Official Assassins Creed 3 box art confirms American Revolution setting. Eurogamer. Retrieved March 1, 2012.
 Robinson, Andy March 1, 2012. Assassins Creed 3 is official, set in America  First images. Computer and Video Games. Retrieved March 1, 2012.
 Ivan, Tom March 2, 2012. News: First Assassins Creed 3 screenshots appear online. Computer and Video Games. Retrieved April 7, 2012.
 Robinson, Andy March 5, 2012. News: Assassins Creed 3 aiming to look nextgen on 360, PS3  Ubisoft. Computer and Video Games. Retrieved April 7, 2012.
 Robinson, Andy March 27, 2012. News: Assassins Creed 3 team looking at Red Dead Redemption success. Computer and Video Games. Retrieved April 7, 2012.
 PDT March 28, 2012. Assassins Creed III female hero would be a pain, says developer  GameSpot.com. GameSpot. Archived from the original on March 30, 2012. Retrieved April 7, 2012.
 Huge Preview: Assassins Creed 3. GameSpy. March 26, 2012. Retrieved August 16, 2012.
 Lorne Balfes Music for Assassins Creed III Released by Ubisoft. Scifi Sacker. 2012. Retrieved 11 November 2018.
 Venables, Michael 7 November 2012. Lorne Balfe: Musical Master of Assassins Creed 3. Forbes. Retrieved 11 November 2018.
 Assassins Creed III Deluxe Edition. Ubi Store. Ubisoft Entertainment. 30 October 2012. Retrieved 11 November 2018.
 Assassins Creed 3: The Tyranny of King Washington Original Game Soundtrack. Ubisoft Music. iTunes. Apple Store, Apple Inc. 1 August 2014. Retrieved 11 November 2018.
 PDT March 29, 2012. Assassins Creed III setting Ubisoft preorder records  GameSpot.com. GameSpot. Archived from the original on April 1, 2012. Retrieved April 7, 2012.
 CVG Staff March 8, 2012. News: Assassins Creed 3 a great time for gamers to join the adventure. Computer and Video Games. Retrieved April 7, 2012.
 More Details Revealed For The Ubisoft Double Packs on PS3  Xbox 360. PlayStation Edge. January 14, 2012. Retrieved May 8, 2012.permanent dead link
 Phillips, Tom March 21, 2012. Assassins Creed Double Edition on EU PlayStation Store. Eurogamer. Retrieved April 7, 2012.
 Play.com offers the Colonial Assassin pack as a preorder bonus. play.com. Retrieved May 8, 2012.
 Phillips, Tom June 13, 2012. Assassins Creed 3 Gold Edition preorder price 109.99. Eurogamer. Retrieved June 26, 2012.
 Caruana, Christine 20121122. PC News: Assassins Creed 3 PC shipment stolen. Computer and Video Games. Retrieved 20121222.
 Assassins Creed 3 Benelux PC shipment halfinched  report. VG247. 20121122. Retrieved 20121222.
 Assassins Creed 3 to be bundled with Nvidias GeForce GTX 650 Ti. VG247. 20121009. Retrieved 20121222.
 Assassins Creed 3 PC makes the most of TXAA technology, boasts nVidia. VG247. 20121130. Retrieved 20121222.
 Assassins Creed 3 ultimate special editions to be auctioned for charity. VG247. 20121130. Retrieved 20121222.
 Williams, Mike June 12, 2012. Assassins Creed III devs have nothing against the British. Games Industry. Retrieved October 26, 2012.
 Kain, Eric July 4, 2012. Watch The Terrible 4th Of July Assassins Creed III LiveAction Trailer. Forbes. Retrieved February 16, 2015.
 Harlup, Andy June 12, 2012. Assassins Creed 3 dev promises: Weve got nothing against the British; Lead writer explains Redcoat bloodfest. Computer and Video Games. Retrieved October 26, 2012.
 Sipple, Brian June 12, 2012. Assassins Creed 3 Writer Denies British Hate. Games Rant. Retrieved October 26, 2012.
 Pinchefsky, Carol October 5, 2012. UK Trailer for Assassins Creed III Is More Historically Accurate Than the US Version. Forbes. Retrieved October 28, 2012.
 Narcisse, Evan October 5, 2012. Heres the Stuff from the New Assassins Creed III Trailer That Ubisoft Doesnt Want Americans to See. Kotaku. Retrieved October 28, 2012.
 Liebl, Matt October 5, 2012. Ubisoft censors American deaths in latest Assassins Creed 3 trailer. GameZone. Retrieved October 28, 2012.
 Lemon, Marshall July 3, 2012. Assassins Creed III Limited Edition for Americans Only. The Escapist. Retrieved October 26, 2012.
 Blyth, Jon October 30, 2012. Assassins Creed OXM UK Review. Official Xbox Magazine UK. Retrieved October 30, 2012.
 Totilo, Stephen October 30, 2012. Assassins Creed III: The Kotaku Review. Kotaku. Retrieved October 30, 2012.
 Theyre all British, but theyre not. Beef Jack. Archived from the original on November 14, 2012. Retrieved November 10, 2012.
 Gilbert, Ben June 4, 2012. Assassins Creed 3 getting its own PS3 hardware bundle, comes with special DLC. Joystiq. Retrieved June 8, 2012.
 Shuman, Sid October 23, 2012. Assassins Creed III: Expose Benedict Arnold Exclusively on PS3. Retrieved October 23, 2012.
 Assassins Creed 3  Freedom Edition Unboxing Video. YouTube.
 Assassins Creed 3 Collectors Editions revealed  available to preorder now  Assassins Creed III for Xbox 360 News. Videogamer.com. Retrieved April 7, 2012.
 Robinson, Andy July 3, 2012. News: 119 Assassins Creed 3 Limited Edition detailed for NA. Computer and Video Games. Retrieved July 28, 2012.
 Funk, John. Assassins Creed III Limited Edition for Americans Only. The Escapist. Retrieved October 28, 2012.
 Assassins Creed 3 Limited Edition, Digital Deluxe Edition Announced. Cinema Blend. July 2, 2012. Retrieved July 28, 2012.
http:shop.ubi.comstoreubiemeadaDKpdThemeID.8605700productID.278584100
 ASSASSINS CREED III  Die Washington Edition kommt  Assassins CreedNewsOffizielle Seite Ubisoft. Retrieved October 6, 2014.
 Redeeming the additional content in the Washington Edition  Assassins Creed 3  PC  Ubisoft Customer Support Site. Retrieved October 6, 2014.
  Assassins Creed III: Washington Edition:    ,  ,  ,   Assassins Creed III: Washington Edition. Retrieved October 6, 2014.
 Haas, Pete October 3, 2012. Assassins Creed 3 Tyranny Of King Washington Is SinglePlayer DLC Campaign. Cinema Blend. Retrieved October 27, 2012.
 ASSASSINS CREED 3: REWARDS. uplay.ubi.com. Retrieved February 5, 2013.
 Marchiafava, Jeff January 17, 2013. First Two Assassins Creed III DLC Packs Now Available On Wii U. Retrieved January 17, 2013.
 Assassins Creed III Hidden Secrets Pack  First Downloadable Content. Ubisoft. Retrieved 20121222.
 Kubba, Sinan December 4, 2012. Assassins Creed 3 Season Pass unlocks Hidden Secrets DLC today. Retrieved December 4, 2012.
 Goldfarb, Andrew January 8, 2013. Assassins Creed III Battle Hardened DLC Out Now. Retrieved January 8, 2013.
 Meet the Tyranny of King Washingtons Ratonhnhak:ton. Ubisoft.com. February 6, 2013. Retrieved February 6, 2013.
 The Tyranny of King Washington Draws Near. Ubisoft. January 24, 2013. Retrieved February 4, 2013.
 Clements, Ryan February 6, 2013. Assassins Creed III: King Washington DLC Release Dates. Retrieved February 6, 2013.
 Assassins Creed III PS3. GameRankings. Retrieved November 28, 2012.
 Assassins Creed III X360. GameRankings. Retrieved November 28, 2012.
 Assassins Creed III WIIU. GameRankings. Retrieved November 28, 2012.
 Assassins Creed III PC. GameRankings. Retrieved November 28, 2012.
 Assassins Creed III for PlayStation 3  Reviews, Ratings, Credits, and More. Metacritic. Retrieved November 28, 2012.
 Assassins Creed III for Wii U  Reviews, Ratings, Credits, and More. Metacritic. Retrieved November 28, 2012.
 Assassins Creed III for Xbox 360  Reviews, Ratings, Credits, and More. Metacritic. Retrieved November 28, 2012.
 Assassins Creed III for PC  Reviews, Ratings, Credits, and More. Metacritic. Retrieved November 28, 2012.
 Assassins Creed III review. Edge. Retrieved November 9, 2012.
 Bramwell, Tom October 30, 2012. Assassins Creed 3 review  Reviews  Xbox 360 . Eurogamer. Retrieved November 9, 2012.
 Webb, Morgan. Assassins Creed 3 Review for Xbox 360. G4TV. Retrieved October 30, 2012.
 Miller, Matt October 30, 2012. Assassins Creed III Staggering Scope And Breadth. Game Informer. Retrieved October 30, 2012.
 Assassins Creed III Xbox 360 Review. GameSpot. Retrieved October 30, 2012.
 Assassins Creed III Review. GamesRadar. October 30, 2012. Retrieved November 9, 2012.
 REVIEW  Assassins Creed III. GameTrailers. Retrieved October 30, 2012.
 Assassins Creed III Review. IGN. Retrieved October 30, 2012.
 Kietzmann, Ludwig October 30, 2012. Assassins Creed 3 review: Declination of independence. Joystiq. Retrieved October 30, 2012.
 Gregory, Joel October 30, 2012. Assassins Creed 3 PS3 review  struggling to break the shackles of the old world. PlayStation Official Magazine UK. Archived from the original on November 2, 2012. Retrieved November 20, 2012.
 Assassins Creed 3 Review. Official Xbox Magazine. Retrieved October 30, 2012.
 http:www.gamerevolution.comreview57743assassinscreediiireview
 Assassins Creed III Review. PC Gamer. Retrieved December 4, 2012.
 Juba, Joe December 4, 2015. Ranking The Entire Assassins Creed Series. Game Informer. GameStop. Retrieved December 5, 2015.
 Journey, Assassins Creed III among Spike Video Game Awards nominees. The Washington Post. Associated Press. November 16, 2012. Retrieved November 28, 2012.
 Academy of Interactive Arts  Sciences  16th Annual D.I.C.E. Awards Finalists PDF. Academy of Interactive Arts  Sciences. January 14, 2013. Archived PDF from the original on February 8, 2013. Retrieved January 14, 2013.
 Sliwinski, Alexander February 8, 2013. Journey takes Game of the Year at DICE awards PDF. Joystiq. Archived from the original on February 8, 2013. Retrieved February 8, 2013.
 Narcisse, Evan January 24, 2013. Here Are the 2012 Games That Developers Want to Give Awards to. Kotaku. Gawker Media. Archived from the original on January 24, 2013. Retrieved January 24, 2013.
 Taormina, Anthony December 7, 2012. 2012 Spike Video Game Awards Winners List. Game Rant. Retrieved December 10, 2013.
 Sonntag, Lawrence December 10, 2012. Winners of the 4th Annual Inside Gaming Awards Announced. Machinima.com. Retrieved December 10, 2013.
 Sonntag, Lawrence November 20, 2012. Inside Gaming Awards 2012 Nominees Announced. Machinima.com. Retrieved December 10, 2013.
 Writers Guild Awards  Previous Nominees  Winners. Writers Guild of America Award. Archived from the original on May 12, 2015. Retrieved December 10, 2013.
 Gera, Emily February 18, 2013. Assassins Creed 3: Liberation wins Writers Guild Award. Polygon. Retrieved December 10, 2013.
 Games in 2013  BAFTA Awards. British Academy of Film and Television Arts. March 5, 2013. Retrieved December 10, 2013.
 13th Annual Game Developers Choice Awards. Game Developers Choice Awards. March 27, 2013. Retrieved December 10, 2013.
 Goldfarb, Andrew October 25, 2012. Assassins Creed III PreOrders Break Ubisoft Record. IGN. Retrieved October 25, 2012.
 Phillips, Tom November 5, 2012. UK chart: Assassins Creed 3 top, second biggest launch of the year. Eurogamer. Retrieved November 9, 2012.
 AC3 Sales. The Inquirer. Retrieved November 5, 2012.
 Matulef, Jeffrey November 6, 2012. Assassins Creed 3 sales estimated at over 3.5 million units. Eurogamer. Retrieved November 28, 2012.
 Assassins Creed III Sales Pass 7 Million. IGN. Retrieved 20121222.
 Ding, Christopher January 4, 2013. Revealed: The UKs Top 20 bestselling games of 2012. Market for Home Computing and Video Games. Archived from the original on January 4, 2013. Retrieved January 4, 2013.
 Mallory, Jordan January 10, 2013. December NPD: 2012 sales hit 13.26 billion, Black Ops 2 leads the pack. Joystiq. AOL. Archived from the original on January 11, 2013. Retrieved January 11, 2013.
 Ivan, Tom 20130207. News: Assassins Creed 3: 12 million sales boost Ubisofts Q3. ComputerAndVideoGames.com. Retrieved 20130221.
 Phillips, Tom November 14, 2012. Assassins Creed 3 PC will be less buggy than the console versions at launch. Eurogamer. Retrieved November 28, 2012.
 Phillips, Tom November 16, 2012. Ubisoft details huge Assassins Creed 3 patch. Eurogamer. Retrieved November 28, 2012.
 Pereira, Chris. Expect a Larger Gap Between Future Assassins Creed Releases. 1up.
 Jackson, Mike. Assassins Creed 3 plot leaves possible sequels plenty of room to play. CVG.
 Phillips, Tom. Ubisoft: Assassins Creed 3 sequels depend on reaction to new hero Connor. Eurogamer.
 Robinson, Andy. Assassins Creed survey suggests 2013 sequel with coop. ComputerAndVideoGames.com. Retrieved 20120120.
 YinPoole, Wesley. Would you like coop in the next Assassins Creed?. Eurogamer. Retrieved 20120120.
 Schreier, Jason February 26, 2013. Assassins Creed IV Is All About Pirates, According To This Poster. Kotaku.com. Retrieved February 26, 2013.
External links
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Assassins Creed III.
Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Assassins Creed: Brotherhood.
Official website
WPVG icon 2016.svgVideo games portalSamsung Galaxy S5 Vector.svg2010s portal
vte
Assassins Creed
Categories: 2012 video gamesActionadventure gamesAssassins CreedBoston in fictionMultiplayer and singleplayer video gamesNintendo Network gamesOpen world video gamesPlayStation 3 gamesPlayStation 4 gamesStealth video gamesUbisoft gamesVideo game sequelsVideo games about the American RevolutionVideo games set in 2012Video games set in the 18th centuryVideo games set in the 21st centuryVideo games set in the BahamasVideo games set in BelizeVideo games set in BrazilVideo games set in CanadaVideo games set in the CaribbeanVideo games set in BostonVideo games set in JamaicaVideo games set in LondonVideo games set in MartiniqueVideo games set in New York CityVideo games set in RomeVideo games set in So PauloVideo games set in the United StatesVideo games developed in CanadaVideo games with downloadable contentWar video games set in the United StatesWii U eShop gamesWii U gamesWindows gamesXbox 360 gamesXbox One gamesCultural depictions of William Kidd

Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag
Assassins Creed IV  Black Flag cover.jpg
DevelopersUbisoft Montreal
PublishersUbisoft
DirectorsJean Guesdon
Ashraf Ismail
Damien Kieken
ProducersMartin Schelling
DesignersEric Baptizat
JeanSebastien Decant
ArtistsRaphael Lacoste
WritersDarby McDevitt
ComposersBrian Tyler
SeriesAssassins Creed
EngineAnvilNext1
PlatformsMicrosoft Windows2
PlayStation 3
PlayStation 43
Wii U
Xbox 360
Xbox One4
Release
October 29, 2013show
GenresActionadventure, stealth
ModesSingleplayer, multiplayer
Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag is an actionadventure video game developed by Ubisoft Montreal and published by Ubisoft. It is the sixth major installment in the Assassins Creed series. Its historical time frame precedes that of Assassins Creed III 2012, though its modernday sequences succeed IIIs own. Black Flag was first released for PlayStation 3, Xbox 360, and Nintendo Wii U in October 2013 and a month later for PlayStation 4, Xbox One, and Microsoft Windows.

The plot is set in a fictional history of real world events and follows the centuriesold struggle between the Assassins, who fight for peace with free will, and the Templars, who desire peace through control. The framing story is set in the 21st century and describes the player as an Abstergo agent. The main story is set in the 18th century Caribbean during the Golden Age of Piracy, and follows notorious Welsh pirate Edward Kenway, grandfather and father of Assassins Creed III protagonist and antagonist Ratonhnhak:ton and Haytham Kenway respectively, who stumbles upon the AssassinTemplar conflict. The attempted establishment of a Republic of Pirates utopia free from either British or Spanish rule is a significant plot element.

Unlike previous games, gameplay elements focus more on shipbased exploration of the seamless open world map, while also retaining the series thirdperson landbased exploration, melee combat, and stealth system. Multiplayer also returns, albeit with only landbased modes and settings. The game spans across the West Indies with the three main cities of Havana, Nassau and Kingston along with numerous islands, sunken ships, and forts. Players have the option to harpoon large sea animals and hunt land animals. For the first time in the series, naval exploration is a major part of an Assassins Creed game, where Edward Kenway captains the Jackdaw, a brig he captures from a Spanish fleet.

Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag was positively received and was one of the bestselling games of 2013. It has sold more than 11 million copies. Critics praised the massive open world gameplay, numerous sidequests, graphics and improved naval combat. The lighthearted pirate theme and engaging story were well received by critics. The modern day story however, received a slightly more mixed response, while criticism fell on aspects of the historical story missions which were considered repetitive. The game received several awards and nominations, including winning the Spike VGX 2013 award for Best Action Adventure Game. It was followed by Assassins Creed Unity and Assassins Creed Rogue, set during the French Revolution and Seven Years War respectively, with both released in November 2014.


Contents
1Gameplay
2Synopsis
2.1Characters
2.2Setting
2.3Plot
2.4Freedom Cry
3Development
3.1Music
4Marketing and release
4.1Downloadable content
5Reception
5.1Sales
5.2Awards
5.3PETA criticism
6Series continuation
7Other data
8See also
9Notes
10References
11External links
Gameplay
Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag is an actionadventure, stealth game set in an open world environment and played from a thirdperson perspective. The game features three main cities; Havana, Kingston, and Nassau, which reside under Spanish, British, and pirate influence, respectively.9 In addition, locations like PortauPrince and smaller locations like Greater Inagua are used as main story points. It also features 50 other individual locations to explore, including atolls, sea forts, Mayan ruins, sugar plantations, and underwater shipwrecks, with a 6040 balance between land and naval exploration.1 It has a more open world feel, with missions similar to those found in Assassins Creed, as well as fewer restrictions for the player. The world opens up sooner in the game, as opposed to Assassins Creed III, which had very scripted missions and did not give players freedom to explore until the game was well into its first act.9101112 The player will encounter jungles, forts, ruins, and small villages and the world is built to allow players much more freedom, such as allowing players to engage, board, and capture passing ships and swimming to nearby beaches in a seamless fashion.113 In addition, the hunting system has been retained from Assassins Creed III, allowing the player to hunt on land, and fish in the water, with resources gathered used to upgrade equipment.1

A new aspect in the game is the Jackdaw, the ship that the player captains. The Jackdaw is upgradeable throughout the game, and is easily accessible to the player when needed.10 In addition, a new underwater component has been added.9 The player has access to a spyglass, allowing the examination of distant ships, along with their cargo and strength. It can also help determine if an island still has animals to hunt, treasures to find, high points to reach for synchronization or additional sidequests to complete, such as assassinations and naval contracts.9 An updated form of the recruit system introduced in Assassins Creed: Brotherhood has returned,9 allowing Edward to recruit crew members. While Kenways crew will remain loyal to him, they can be promoted to captain acquired ships, and are needed to assist in boarding enemy vessels, they cannot assist in combat or perform longrange assassinations, as in previous games. Ubisoft removed this aspect of the brotherhood system, believing it allowed players to bypass tense and challenging scenarios too easily.14

In the present day, at the offices of Abstergo Entertainmenta subsidiary of Abstergo Industriesin Montreal, Quebec, players engage in modernday pirating through the exploration of Abstergos offices, eavesdropping and hacking, all without combat. As well, various hacking games, similar to previous cluster and glyph puzzles, are present, that uncover secrets about Abstergo.15

Multiplayer also returns, with new settings and game modes, though it is only landbased.9

Synopsis
Characters
The main character of the game is Edward Kenway Matt Ryan,16 a Welsh17 privateerturnedpirate and eventual member of the Assassin Order. Edward is the father of Haytham Kenway, and grandfather of Ratonhnhak:ton Connor, the two playable characters of Assassins Creed III. Reallife individuals that are encountered include the pirates Edward Blackbeard Thatchnote 118 voiced by Mark Bonnar,16 Benjamin Hornigold,9 Mary Read,9 Stede Bonnet,9 Anne Bonny,9 Calico Jack,9 and Charles Vane9 Ralph Ineson.16

Setting
As is the case in previous games in the Assassins Creed series, the story is divided into two intertwined halves, with one in the present day, one in a historical setting, and the events of each influencing the other. Although the presentday story had previously established that an Animus was required to view ones ancestors memories, the ending of Assassins Creed III reveals that Abstergo can now view a hosts genetic memories simply by sequencing the hosts DNA. As such, the player character is hired by Abstergo Entertainment to investigate a pivotal character in Desmonds ancestry, the Assassin Edward Kenway.19 A notorious pirate and privateer operating during the Golden Age of Piracy, Kenways story is set in the Caribbean, and mixes openended shipbased exploration with combat and landbased adventures in Cuba and Jamaica, and on a number of Caribbean islands, parts of southern Florida and eastern Mexico.202122

Plot
Samples taken from Desmond Miles body in the moments after his death have allowed Abstergo Industries to continue exploring his genetic memories using the Animus newfound cloud computing abilities. The unnamed player character is hired by Abstergo Entertainment, from their Montral headquarters, to sift through the memories of Edward Kenway, an eighteenthcentury pirate, the father of Haytham Kenway and the grandfather of Ratonhnhak:ton. Ostensibly, this is to gather material for an Animuspowered interactive feature film. In reality, Abstergothe Templars of the present timeare searching for a First Civilization structure known as the Observatory, and are using Edwards memories to find it.

As Edward, the player unravels a conspiracy between highranking Templars within the British and Spanish empires who, under the guise of cleaning up piracy in the Caribbean, have used their positions to locate the Sagelater identified as Bartholomew Robertswho is the only man that can lead them to the Observatory, a First Civilization device which can monitor anyone anywhere in the world when provided a blood sample, which they intend to use to spy on and blackmail world leaders. Edward becomes an unwitting player in their plot when he kills a rogue Assassin, Duncan Walpole. Seeing an opportunity for profit, Edward takes Walpoles place at a meeting of Templars in Havana, where he meets Woodes Rogers as well as Cuban Governor, and Templar Grandmaster, Laureano Torres. His recklessness endangers the entire Assassins Order, prompting him to pursue the Sage and the conspirators from the Yucatn Peninsula to Jamaica, eventually catching Roberts on the island of Prncipe off of the African coast.

Meanwhile, a band of notorious piratesincluding Edward Blackbeard Thatch, Benjamin Hornigold, Mary Read under the alias James Kidd and Charles Vane, among othersdream of a pirate utopia where man is free to live beyond the reach of kings and rulers. With Edwards help, they seize control of Nassau and establish a pirate republic. However, poor governance, a lack of an economy and an outbreak of disease bring the pirate state perilously close to collapse, with the founders divided on the best way forward. Edward attempts to resolve the dispute, but is too late to stop the Templars from exploiting the situation for their own ends.

Eventually, Edward and Roberts uncover the location of the Observatory and retrieve the artifact powering it, but Roberts betrays Edward at the last moment. After a brief stint in prison for the crimes of piracy, Edward escapes with the aid of Ah Tabai, the Assassin Mentor, and elects to join their Order. Chasing down and eliminating Roberts and the Templar conspirators, Edward retrieves the artifact and returns it to the Observatory, sealing it away for good. He is left facing an uncertain future with his newfound convictions until he receives a letter informing him of the passing of his wife and the imminent arrival of his hitherto unknown daughter, Jennifer Scott. Edward travels back to England, promising Ah Tabai that he will continue the fight against the Templars back home in England. Some years later, Edward, Jennifer using her mothers surname in her memory and Edwards young son Haytham attend a play in an English theatre.

In the present day, the player is contacted by John, Abstergo Entertainments information technology manager. John convinces the player that their employers know more than they are telling, and encourages them to investigate in more detail. He convinces the player to hack several Animus terminals and security cameras, and then has them deliver the information taken to Shaun Hastings and Rebecca Crane, who are working undercover to infiltrate Abstergo. When the facility is locked down after the hackings are discovered, John arranges for the player to access the Animus core, at which point Juno materializes into an incorporeal form. She reveals that although it was necessary to open her temple to avert disaster, the world was not ready for her, and she is unable to affect it or possess the player character as her agents intended. John is unmasked as the reincarnated form of the Sage and attempts to murder the player to cover up the failed attempt at resurrecting Juno, but is killed by Abstergos security before he can do so, thus implicating him as the one responsible for the hacks. As Roberts, the Sage admits to Kenway that he owes no allegiance to the Assassins or the Templars and instead uses whoever he thinks represents his best chance of achieving his ends. With the Sage dead, the player is contacted by the Assassins as they continue their infiltration of Abstergo, but neither side is able to explain the Sages presence or identify his followers, the Instruments of the First Will.note 2

Freedom Cry
The Freedom Cry downloadable content is set twenty years after the events of Black Flag and follows Adwal in his mission as an Assassin.

While attempting to intercept Templar activities in the West Indies Sea, Adwal is shipwrecked off the coast of Haiti. Making his way into PortauPrince, he establishes that the Templars are working with Bastienne Josphe, the proprietor of a local brothel and a sympathiser to the Maroons, a faction of freedom fighters made up of liberated slaves led by Augustin Dieufort. Despite his obligations to the Brotherhood of Assassins, Adwal becomes sympathetic to their cause, and joins with the Maroons in hijacking a vessel, Experto Crede, in order to interrupt the slave trade.

Whilst working for Bastienne, Adwal begins to uncover a conspiracy within the French provincial government ruling PortauPrince. The local governor, Pierre de Fayet, plans a clandestine scientific expedition to measure the curvature of the earth and gather geographical data, which they intend to sell to the highest bidder with the promise of naval superiority. Adwal successfully sabotages the expedition by substituting the illiterate slaves being used by the expedition for literate members of the Maroons.

Tensions begin to arise within the Maroons when Adwal plots further raids against the slave trade. Bastienne objects, as de Fayet will only punish those trapped in slavery further as punishment. Adwal ignores her, but is horrified when he witnesses a frigate fire on an unarmed slave ship to prevent the slaves from joining the Maroons. Adwal boards the slave ship and manages to save a few slaves from drowning before the ship capsized with the rest. He plans retribution, but Bastienne cautions that taking revenge will weaken the Maroons cause; if Adwal is to kill de Fayet, then he should do so acting as an agent of justice. After assaulting the Governors Mansion, pursuing him through the city and fighting off a local garrison, Adwal finally corners and kills de Fayet, who claims that slaves are incapable of selfgovernance and turn to armed uprising at the slightest provocation. Adwal points out that none of the slaves or overseers came to his aid, and instead let him die. After killing de Fayet, Adwal returns to say goodbye to Bastienne before returning to the Assassin Order, but pledging to use his newfound convictions to aid people who are oppressed rather than the cause of their wouldbe liberators.

Development
In early February 2013, during its quarterly financial call to investors, Ubisoft CEO Yves Guillemot confirmed that the next Assassins Creed game, due for release some time before April 2014, would feature a new hero, time period, and development team.23 On February 28, 2013, Ubisoft posted their first promotional picture and cover for their next Assassins Creed game, following leaked marketing material days before.24 It announced the title of the game as Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag and featured an unnamed character holding a flintlock and a sword with a black flag in the back ground containing the Assassins symbol with a skull.24 A reported glitch on the official Assassins Creed IV website suggested the game will release on nextgen consoles and October 29 as the release date,25 which was confirmed by the first trailer for the game, released on March 4, 2013 originally leaked on March 2, 2013, but was quickly pulled by Ubisoft.12627

Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag was announced with a cinematic trailer on March 4, 2013.26 Development began in mid2011 at Ubisoft Montreal by a separate team from the one on Assassins Creed III, with additional work done by Ubisoft studios in Annecy, Bucharest, Kyiv, Montpellier, Singapore and Sofia.9

Lead content manager Carsten Myhill stressed away the sentiment that the sequel should have been a spinoff in the same vein as Assassins Creed: Brotherhood or Assassins Creed: Revelations, given the ostensible similarities with Assassins Creed III. He stated The whole feeling of the game is completely fresh and new. It will feel very different from Assassins Creed III. I think it completely warrants the Assassins Creed IV moniker, not only with the new name and setting, but the attitude and the tone of the experience.28 Assassins Creed IV is the first main series numbered title to carry a subtitle, a decision which Myhill says was made to clearly distinguish the pirate theme from the rest of the franchise.28

By utilizing the AnvilNext engine, the development team is able to work with one engine for both the nextgen and currentgen versions of the game, as the AnvilNext engine was designed with nextgen capabilities in mind, while still working on currentgen systems.1 In addition, each system will have their own intricacies and feature sets, with support for the different controllers and utilizing features specific to each console.1 The PC version supports Nvidias TXAA.29

Music
Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag Original Game Soundtrack
Soundtrack album by Brian Tyler
ReleasedOctober 16, 2013
GenreVideo game soundtrack
Length2:01:33
LabelUbisoft Music
Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag Original Game Soundtrack was composed by American composer Brian Tyler, who also composed the soundtrack of the previous Ubisoft title Far Cry 3. Additional compositions and arrangements were provided by Sarah Schachner, Omar Fadel,30 Steve Davis, Mike Kramer, Jeremy Lamb, Matthew Llewellyn, and Robert Lydecker. The soundtrack was released on Amazon MP331 and iTunes on October 14, 2013.32 Two other soundtracks have also been released:

Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag Game Soundtrack  Sea Shanty Edition, a second soundtrack containing a set of 16 sea shanties composed by various artists, was released on Amazon MP333 and iTunes on October 29, 2013.34
Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag Game Soundtrack  The Complete Edition, a complete soundtrack including the two previous soundtracks as well as the multiplayer soundtrack composed by Joe Henson and Alexis Smith, was released on Amazon MP335 and iTunes on December 2, 2013.36
The score to the Freedom Cry DLC was composed by French composer Olivier Deriviere. It was recorded at Avatar Studios in New York with La Troupe Makandal, a dedicated group for Haitian music, and at Galaxy Studios in Belgium with the Brussels Philharmonic.37

Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag Original Game Soundtrack  Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag Game Soundtrack  The Complete Edition Disc One
Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag Game Soundtrack  Sea Shanty Edition  Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag Game Soundtrack  The Complete Edition Disc Two
Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag Game Soundtrack  The Complete Edition Disc Three
Notes
a signifies a song that is included in the Skull Edition38
Marketing and release
Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag was released worldwide for PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 on October 29, 2013,567 while the Wii U was released on October 29, 2013 in North America,367 November 21, 2013 in Australia, November 22, 2013 in Europe2 and November 28, 2013 in Japan.39 The Wii U version in Europe was delayed from its original November 1, 2013 release date.2 It was announced on March 1, 2013 that the game will also come to the PlayStation 4, and on May 21 that it will release on the Xbox One.4 Both versions were launch titles, with the PlayStation 4 version releasing on November 15 and November 29, 2013 in North America and Europe, respectively,67 and November 22, 2013 worldwide for Xbox One.67

Ubisoft partnered with Sony to bring exclusive content to the PlayStation 3 and PlayStation 4 versions of the game,40 which will feature the protagonist of Assassins Creed III: Liberation, Aveline de Grandpr, in three missions. The Aveline content, which was written by Liberation writer Jill Murray, picks up after the conclusion of her story in Liberation.41 The content is also available on the PC platform, through the Uplay Gold Edition.42

On June 21, 2013, it was announced that the Microsoft Windows version had been delayed a few weeks from its intended release of October 29, 2013.43 Its new release dates were later revealed to be November 19, 2013 in North America and November 22, 2013 in Europe.2 Lead designer JeanSebastien Decant explained that the delay was caused by the team working on the master version first, making sure it works and then proceeding to the other versions. For Black Flag, the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 version was the master, before the team adapted it to the other consoles.44

On October 31, 2013 Ubisoft announced that the Uplay Passport requirement would be removed from Assassins Creed IV and all future games. Uplay Passport came with all new copies of the game and was required for accessing multiplayer and Edwards Fleet minigame. Owners of used copies could download Uplay Passport for a fee before the removal.4546

A Japanese manga adaptation of the game, written by Takashi Yano and illustrated by Kenji Oiwa, began serialization in Shueishas Jump X magazine on August 10, 2013.47 The manga however contradicts many parts of the games actual storyline, despite the manga being an adaptation of the game.

Downloadable content
On October 8, 2013, Ubisoft announced that a Season Pass would be available for purchase at the launch of the game on PlayStation 3, PlayStation 4, Xbox 360, Xbox One and PC, and would include the Freedom Cry singleplayer missions, Kraken Ship pack featuring elements to personalize the Jackdaw, as well as additional singleplayer and multiplayer elements.48

Freedom Cry sees the player take on the role of Adwal, a freed slave from Trinidad who became Edward Kenways Quartermaster, and later a member of the Assassin Order. The story mode takes place 20 years after the events of Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag where Adwal has become a trained assassin with the Order and finds himself shipwrecked in SaintDomingue, where he comes facetoface with some of the most brutal slavery in the West Indies. The DLC is written by Jill Murray, who wrote Liberation and the Aveline content for Black Flag.49 In February 2014, it was announced that Freedom Cry would be released as a standalone title on the PlayStation 4 and PlayStation 3 on February 18, 2014 for North America and February 19, 2014 for Europe. It was released for the PC on February 25, 2014.50

Blackbeards Wrath allows the player to play any one of three new characters in Black Flags multiplayer mode. These characters include Blackbeard, The Jaguar and The Orchid. This DLC is free with the Season Pass.51

Guild of Rogues adds three new characters to the multiplayer mode. These characters are The Shaman, The Siren and The Stowaway. It was not released for the Wii U.52

The PlayStation 3 and PlayStation 4 releases both contain an exclusive DLC, Aveline. As an exception it is available on PC in the Uplay Digital Deluxe Edition and Jackdaw Edition only.

A Game of The Year version, called the Jackdaw Edition, was released in the UK for sale exclusively on Amazon.com. It was made available for Xbox One and PlayStation 4 consoles as well as PC. The edition includes all previously released downloadable content. No comparable editions were created for territories outside of the UK.

Reception
Reception
Aggregate score
AggregatorScore
MetacriticPS3 8810053
WIIU 8610054
X360 8610055
PS4 8310056
PC 8410057
Review scores
PublicationScore
CVG91058
Edge91059
EGM9.51060
Eurogamer91061
Famitsu374062
Game Informer8.251063
GameSpot91064
Giant Bomb45 stars65
IGN8.51066
Joystiq45 stars67
OPM UK81068
OXM US9.01069
PC Gamer UK9070
VideoGamer.com71071
The Escapist55 stars72
Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag received generally favorable reviews, according to review aggregator Metacritic, with critics praising the open world gameplay, sidequests, graphics and naval combat. In November 2013, Hardcore Gamer ranked Black Flag as the 70th greatest game of the seventh generation era.73

Black Flag was generally praised as superior to Assassins Creed III,6771 with Game Informers Joe Juba noting that Ubisoft responded to criticisms the previous game faced and rectified them.63 CVGs Matt Gilman called the game a return to form for the franchise,58 while Mikel Reparaz of Official Xbox Magazine stated that After weathering the somewhat diminishing returns of Revelations and ACIII, Black Flag is exactly the shot in the arm Assassins Creed needed.69 Two days after its release, IGN ranked Black Flag as the 2nd best game in the Assassins Creed series, only behind Assassins Creed II.74

Several reviewers directed heavy acclaim to the games open world structure, with the Edge staff declaring that Black Flag sets new benchmarks not only for Ubisofts series but for openworld gaming.59 Eurogamers Tom Bramwell called the open world gameplay a surprising breath of fresh sea air,61 with Gilman stating it revitalizes the series.58 The large scale of the open world was praised,66 with Greg Tito of The Escapist saying that the game opens up the whole Caribbean.72 Reviewers also praised the games sidequests and collectibles,58 as it actively encouraged the player to explore the open world,6166 with GameSpots Shaun McInnis saying that Black Flag presents a world full of adventure and opportunity and full of reasons to go exploring.64 The sidequests were generally agreed to be superior to the main missions,6063 with IGNs Marty Sliva stating that Black Flag is at its best when you set out in search of your own fun.66 The assassination sidemissions were particularly praised.6370 The seamless exploration between ship, land, and sea without loading was also praised.6470

The graphics were also widely acclaimed. The Edge staff stated that From a graphical standpoint, Black Flags world is built to amaze regardless of which console generation youre playing it on.59 Reviewers praised the games open world as beautiful and gorgeous;5864 Sliva called Black Flag one of the best looking games of 2013.66 The games level of detail was also acclaimed,60 with the open worlds water, rain and sea, being cited as amazing to look at.5863

The games naval combat system drew much praise. Reviewers noted that the naval combat was Assassins Creed IIIs best feature, and consequently praised Black Flag for improving on it.59 Tito explained that, while Assassins Creed IIIs naval missions were linear and limited, Black Flag offered the player much greater freedom by allowing them to explore, fight or sail whenever they wanted.72 McInnis said that the game places a huge emphasis on naval combat, and stated that it builds on ACIIIs naval side missions to create an experience every bit as important as running around on dry land.64 The naval combat received praise for its additions of boarding ships and attacking forts,72 as well as the seamless transitions between ship and sword gameplay,6470 with Tito calling it a great dual system that rewards both skill in naval combat, and in pirate action.72

The stealth in the game was praised for being more flexible than previous games by allowing the player more options to accomplish their goals.5864 The Edge staff said that Stealth games are only as good as the flexibility of their encounters, and in that regard Black Flag is the most generous Assassins Creed game to date.59 However, some also criticized the stealth for being frustrating,63 due to its clunky and poorly defined controls.6171 Reviewers noted that fighting as Edward was similar to previous games,68 with some criticizing it for being monotonous,61 too easy,58 and lacking nuance.72 However, it was also praised for being an effective and violent power trip,70 and for being fluid and lively.64 Some also complained about the enemy A.I. for lacking intelligence.687071 The simplified crafting system was praised for improving over Assassins Creed IIIs,6469 with reviewers noting it took inspiration from Far Cry 3.5970

The story received a positive response overall. Reparaz praised it as engrossing and one of the Assassins Creed series best. Reparaz and McInnis also complimented the characters, and praised the way the story explores the human side of pirates, painting them in a sympathetic and relatable light.6469 Bramwell felt that the story flourishes, particularly praising the supporting characters and Edwards character arc.61 PlayStation Official Magazines Joel Gregory felt that Black Flags storyline was nothing unique for the series, though he praised the characters as far more interesting, more likeable, and more varied than previous games.68 While he praised the storys first half, Gilman was more critical of the latter half, adding that its flawed pacing and structure resulted in player apathy towards the characters.58 Both Sliva and Juba also criticized the main story,66 with Juba complaining about its lack of purpose, or a compelling antagonist, and felt that most of the supporting characters were underdeveloped.63

The story missions had a mixed reception. Reparaz, who gave the game high praise, felt that they were the weakest aspect of Black Flag.69 Juba and VideoGamer.coms Steven Burns both felt that most of the story missions were extremely repetitive and were tediously tiring.6371 Tito, however, felt that they were varied, and that the frustrating portions compensated by being challenging.72 One particular aspect that received heavy criticism from most reviewers were the eavesdropping and tailing missions,59616364697172 with several noting that these problems should have been fixed or removed entirely from the series.5868 The tailing objectives were also extended to shipsea missions, with reviewers also criticizing this form of naval stealth.5967 The games pacing and opening were praised, as it introduced the pirate gameplay without the need of an overly long tutorial,606670 with Juba noting it an improvement over Assassins Creed III.63

Several reviewers labelled Black Flag a more pirate game than it is an Assassins Creed one, due to its heavy focusing on pirating in gameplay, story, and characters.59676870 Reviewers felt that it was better for the game; they praised Black Flags more lighthearted fare and tone compared to previous games,596671 while also believing the game wisely avoided the usual convoluted Assassins plot in favor of a simplistic pirate story.6670 Gilman stated that Black Flag is a better pirate game than it is an assassin game,58 with PC Gamers Tom Senior remarking that Black Flag doesnt really want to be an Assassins Creed game, and ... that is a welcome move.70 Reparaz called it the greatest pirate game he had ever played,69 while Electronic Gaming Monthlys Ray Carsillo declared Black Flag to be probably the best pirate simulation in gaming history.60 Tito stated that Black Flags gameplay reminded him more of a 3D version of Sid Meiers Pirates! than any Assassins Creed game.72 Edward Kenways character as a selfmotivated pirate rather than an Assassin was also praised by most.61646671 Sliva believed that Edwards character was a refreshing change of pace from a series that had started to take itself a bit too seriously,66 while he and Gilman stated that Edward was a livelier and more palatable protagonist than Assassins Creed IIIs Connor.5866

In December 2015, Game Informer ranked the game as the fifth best game in the Assassins Creed series to date.75

Sales
During the first week of sales in the United Kingdom, Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag became the bestselling game on all available formats, ahead of Battlefield 4.76 However, the games opening week sales were 60 down compared to 2012s Assassins Creed III. Ubisoft blamed the fall in demand on uncertainty caused by the upcoming transition to eighth generation consoles.77 According to NPD Group figures, Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag was the third bestselling game of November 2013 in the United States, only behind Call of Duty: Ghosts and Battlefield 4.78 In May 2014, Ubisoft announced that the game had shipped over 11 million copies.79

Awards
Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag has received Game of the Year nominations from media outlets Cheat Code Central,80 GameSpot,81 and the Inside Gaming Awards,82 It won the Spike VGX 2013 award for Best Action Adventure Game,83 and the GameSpot awards for PS4 Game of the Year and Xbox One Game of the Year.8485

List of notable awards and nominations for Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag
PETA criticism
The People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals PETA, an animal rights organisation criticised Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag for the usage of harpoons and glorification of whaling. The organisation said it was disgraceful that the video game industry didnt condemn the addition.137 Ubisoft responded to the claims by saying that Assassins Creeds is based on history and is a work of fiction which depicts real events during the Golden Era of Pirates. Ubisoft claimed they do not condone whaling, along with other mechanics and features in the 4th installment in the series.138

PETA has had a history of criticising video games, some of the notable cases being Mario and Pokmon.139

Series continuation
Main articles: Assassins Creed Unity and Assassins Creed Rogue
Assassins Creed Unity, set in Paris on the eve of the French Revolution,140 was released worldwide on PlayStation 4, Xbox One and Windows on November 11, 2014.141

Additionally, Assassins Creed Rogue is the sequel to Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag and the prequel to both Unity and III, following Shay Cormac, an AssassinturnedTemplar who hunts members of the Assassin order. Taking place in North America during the Seven Years War, the game was released worldwide on PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 on November 11, 2014.142

Other data
In November 2013 the video game company of Ubisoft financed the exhumation of the remains of the Spanish corsair Amaro Pargo to reconstruct his face for its possible appearance in Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag. For the first time in history,143 a company in the video game industry exhumed the remains of a historical character in a pioneering campaign that got the attention of national and international media. In addition, this exhumation had important discoveries on the physiognomy of this mythical corsair.144

See also
Skull  Bones  expanded on the naval battles of Black Flag145
Notes
 The character is referred to as Thatch in this game, rather than the more common Teach. Thatch is one of the many variations of Blackbeards name known to have existed. Please see Blackbeard: Early life for more information.
 The player is able to find collectible items scattered throughout both past and presentday game worlds. These items establish the Sages backstory and are used as a means of communicating with other unidentified agents of the First Civilization.
References
 Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag  Game Reveal Interview. IGN.com. March 4, 2013. Retrieved March 4, 2013.
 Dyer, Mitch September 30, 2013. Assassins Creed 4 PC Release Date Revealed, Wii U Version Delayed. IGN. Retrieved September 30, 2013.
 REPORT: Assassins Creed IV Coming in October, NextGen Confirmed. GameTrailers. March 1, 2013.
 Drake, Audrey May 21, 2013. Assassins Creed 4 Confirmed for Xbox One. IGN. Retrieved May 21, 2013.
 Gera, Emily October 15, 2013. Assassins Creed 4: Black Flag European release date moved forward for Xbox 360 and PS3. Polygon. Retrieved October 15, 2013.
 Hamilton, Kirk October 1, 2013. Assassins Creed IV Gets A PC Release Date. Kotaku. Retrieved October 1, 2013.
 Holzworth, Chris October 29, 2013. RUMOR: Assassins Creed IV Aveline DLC to Remain a PlayStation Exclusive. Electronic Gaming Monthly. Retrieved October 29, 2013.
 Ivan, Tom September 30, 2013. Assassins Creed 4 receives firm PS4, PC, Xbox One release dates. Computer and Video Games. Retrieved November 20, 2013.
 Totilo, Stephen March 4, 2013. Be Excited About Assassins Creed IV. And Be Skeptical. Kotaku.com. Retrieved March 4, 2013.
 Hanson, Ben March 4, 2013. Exploring The Open World Of Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag. Gameinformer.com. Retrieved March 4, 2013.
 Assassins Creed III Review. PC Gamer. Retrieved December 4, 2012.
 Assassins Creed 3 Review. Official Xbox Magazine. Retrieved October 30, 2012.
 Vore, Bryan March 4, 2013. Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag. Gameinformer.com. Retrieved March 4, 2013.
 Juba, Joe 2013. Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag How to be a pirate. GameInformer. GameStop. XXIII 244: 62.
 Lakha, Parvez August 2, 2013. Assassins Creed IV Black Flag  Present Day QA. Ubiblog. Ubisoft. Retrieved August 3, 2013.
 Kato, Matthew August 30, 2013. Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag Voice Actors discuss Their Craft. Game Informer. GameStop. Retrieved August 30, 2013.
 Williams, Kathryn September 22, 2013. PIRATE HERO IN NEW ASSASSINS CREED GAME IS A WELSHMAN. WalesOnline. WalesOnline. Retrieved May 20, 2014.
 McDevitt, Darby March 25, 2013. PS: We are using Ed Thatch for Blackbeard, not the more common but probably incorrect Teach. Ask Colin Woodard why... Twitter. Retrieved July 8, 2013.
 George, Richard March 4, 2013. The Dawn of Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag. IGN. Retrieved August 30, 2013.
 Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag Is The Next Assassins Creed, Ubisoft Confirms. Now, About That... Kotaku. February 28, 2013.
 Plunkett, Luke February 26, 2013. The Other Side of that Supposed Assassins Creed IV Poster is a Map. Kotaku. Retrieved July 24, 2013.
 VanOrd, Kevin June 10, 2013. Assassins Creed IV: A Pirates Life for Thee. GameSpot. Retrieved July 24, 2013.
 Dyer, Mitch February 7, 2013. Next Assassins Creed Has New Hero, Time Period, Developer. IGN. Retrieved February 7, 2013.
 Schreier, Jason February 26, 2013. Assassins Creed IV Is All About Pirates, According To This Poster. Kotaku.com. Retrieved February 26, 2013.
 Philips, Tom. Assassins Creed 4: Black Flag release date, nextgen launch leaked. Eurogamer.
 Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag  Debut Trailer. IGN.com. March 4, 2013. Retrieved March 4, 2013.
 Mallory, Jordan March 2, 2013. Assassins Creed 4: Black Flag debut trailer leaks Update: Its gone!. Joystiq. Retrieved March 13, 2013.
 Hussain, Tamoor March 4, 2013. Assassins Creed 4 moniker completely warranted, insists Ubisoft dev. Retrieved March 5, 2013.
 Lavaris, Romeo June 17, 2013. E3 2013 Prepare For Adventure With Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag. Geforce. Retrieved August 30, 2013.
 omar fadel  ACBF. SoundCloud. Retrieved 5 November 2014.
 Assassins Creed 4: Black Flag Original Game Soundtrack. Amazon.com. Retrieved 20160920.
 Assassins Creed 4: Black Flag Original Game Soundtrack. iTunesApple Inc. Retrieved December 20, 2013.
 Assassins Creed 4: Black Flag Sea Shanty Edition. Amazon.com. Retrieved 20160920.
 Assassins Creed 4: Black Flag Sea Shanty Edition Original Game Soundtrack. iTunesApple Inc. Retrieved December 20, 2013.
 Assassins Creed 4: Black Flag The Complete Edition. Amazon.com. Retrieved 20160920.
 Assassins Creed 4: Black Flag The Complete Edition Original Game Soundtrack. iTunesApple Inc. Retrieved December 20, 2013.
 Usher, William December 17, 2013. Assassins Creed 4 Interview: Olivier Deriviere Talks Freedom Cry. Gaming Blend. Cinema Blend. Retrieved December 18, 2013.
 Bit disappointed with the Skull editions soundtrack. forums.ubi.com. November 5, 2013. Retrieved January 10, 2014.
  4 1128 4. Famitsu. July 4, 2013.
 Graziani, Gabriel March 4, 2013. Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag Coming to PS4  PS3, PlayStationExclusive Content. Retrieved March 5, 2013.
 Lewis, Anne July 29, 2013. Assassins Creed IV Black Flag  Aveline Returns. Ubiblog. Ubisoft. Retrieved August 3, 2013.
 Uplay Store  Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag Gold Edition
 Plunkett, Luke June 21, 2013. Assassins Creed Delayed On PC. Again. But This Time Its OK. Retrieved June 21, 2013.
 Corriea, Alexa Ray October 2, 2013. Why Assassins Creed always launches last on PC. Polygon. Retrieved October 4, 2013.
 Steinman, Gary 31 October 2013. Assassins Creed IV Black Flag and Uplay Passport. Ubiblog. Ubisoft. Retrieved 1 November 2013.
 YinPoole, Wesley 1 November 2013. Ubisoft ditches Uplay Passport after Assassins Creed 4 furore. Eurogamer. Gamer Network. Retrieved 1 November 2013.
 Welcome to the N.H.K.s Oiwa Draws Assassins Creed 4 Manga. Anime News Network. July 9, 2013. Retrieved December 20, 2013.
 Assassins Creed IV Black Flag Season Pass. Retrieved October 11, 2013.
 Steinman, Gary December 12, 2013. ASSASSINS CREED IV BLACK FLAG  FREEDOM CRY DLC RELEASE DATE  STORY. Ubiblog. Ubisoft. Retrieved December 18, 2013.
 Karmali, Luke 5 February 2014. Assassins Creed 4: Freedom Cry Releasing as Standalone Title. IGN. Ziff Davis. Retrieved 5 February 2014.
 Lewis, Anne. ASSASSINS CREED IV BLACK FLAG  BLACKBEARDS WRATH DLC. UbiBlog. Retrieved 25 January 2014.
 Farokhmanesh, Megan 11 February 2014. Ubisoft releases Assassins Creed 4: Black Flag Guild of Rogues DLC. Polygon. Vox Media. Retrieved 11 February 2014.
 Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag for PlayStation 3 Reviews. Metacritic. Retrieved September 28, 2017.
 Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag for Wii U Reviews. Metacritic. Retrieved September 28, 2017.
 Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag for Xbox 360 Reviews. Metacritic. Retrieved September 28, 2017.
 Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag for PlayStation 4 Reviews. Metacritic. Retrieved September 28, 2017.
 Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag for PC Reviews. Metacritic. Retrieved September 28, 2017.
 Gilman, Matt October 29, 2013. Review: Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag marks a return to form for the franchise. ComputerAndVideoGames.com. Retrieved December 9, 2013.
 Edge Staff October 29, 2013. Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag review. Edge. Retrieved December 9, 2013.
 Carsillo, Ray October 29, 2013. EGM Review: Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag NextGen. Electronic Gaming Monthly. Retrieved December 21, 2013.
 Bramwell, Tom October 29, 2013. Assassins Creed 4: Black Flag review. Eurogamer. Retrieved December 9, 2013.
 Romano, Sal November 19, 2013. Famitsu Review Scores: Issue 1303. Gematsu. Retrieved December 9, 2013.
 Juba, Joe October 29, 2013. Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag. Game Informer. Retrieved November 29, 2013.
 McInnis, Shaun October 29, 2013. Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag Review. GameSpot. Retrieved October 29, 2013.
 Navarro, Alex December 3, 2013. Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag Review. Giant Bomb. Retrieved December 9, 2013.
 Sliva, Marty October 29, 2013. Assassins Creed 4: Black Flag. IGN. Retrieved October 29, 2013.
 Kietzmann, Ludwig October 29, 2013. Assassins Creed 4 review: Avast, conspiracy ahead. Joystiq. Retrieved November 14, 2013.
 Gregory, Joel October 29, 2013. Assassins Creed 4: Black Flag PS4 review. Official PlayStation Magazine. Archived from the original on November 29, 2013. Retrieved November 29, 2013.
 Reparaz, Mikel October 29, 2013. Assassins Creed IV Black Flag review. Official Xbox Magazine. Retrieved November 29, 2013.
 Senior, Tom November 27, 2013. Assassins Creed 4: Black Flag review. PC Gamer. Retrieved November 29, 2013.
 Burns, Steven October 29, 2013. Assassins Creed 4: Black Flag Review. VideoGamer.com. Retrieved December 9, 2013.
 Tito, Greg October 29, 2013. Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag Review  Pirate this Game!. The Escapist. Retrieved December 9, 2013.
 HG Staff November 5, 2013. Top 100 Games of the Generation: 7061. Hardcore Gamer. Retrieved December 10, 2013.
 Davis, Justin October 31, 2013. The Best Assassins Creed Games. IGN. Retrieved December 10, 2013.
 Juba, Joe December 4, 2015. Ranking The Entire Assassins Creed Series. Game Informer. GameStop. Retrieved December 5, 2015.
 Scammell, David November 7, 2013. Assassins Creed sales down 60 yearonyear, Battlefield 4 down 69 on Battlefield 3. VideoGamer.com. Retrieved December 20, 2013.
 Scammell, David November 13, 2013. Assassins Creed 4 sales slump attributed to nextgen launch. VideoGamer.com. Retrieved December 20, 2013.
 Conditt, Jessica December 12, 2013. November NPD: PS4 is topselling console, Xbox One is fastestselling Update: Nintendo boasts big numbers, too. Joystiq. Retrieved December 20, 2013.
 Campbell, Eric May 15, 2014. Assassins Creed 4: Ships 10 Million Copies. IGN. Retrieved May 16, 2014.
 Game of the Year Winner 2013. Cheat Code Central. December 7, 2013. Retrieved December 15, 2013.
 Overall Game of the Year 2013 Winner. GameSpot. December 19, 2013. Retrieved December 19, 2013.
 Smith, Rob November 21, 2013. Inside Gaming Awards 2013 Nominees Announced. Machinima.com. Retrieved December 5, 2013.
 Dane, Patrick December 7, 2013. Grand Theft Auto V Tops Spike VGX 2013 Award Winners List. Game Rant. Retrieved December 7, 2013.
 PS4 Game of the Year 2013 Winner. GameSpot. December 14, 2013. Retrieved December 14, 2013.
 Xbox One Game of the Year 2013 Winner. GameSpot. December 16, 2013. Retrieved December 16, 2013.
 Game of the Year Nominees 2013. Cheat Code Central. December 6, 2013. Retrieved December 15, 2013.
 Studio of the Year Nominees 2013. Cheat Code Central. December 6, 2013. Retrieved December 15, 2013.
 Best Graphics Nominees 2013. Cheat Code Central. December 6, 2013. Retrieved December 15, 2013.
 Best ActionAdventure Game Nominees 2013. Cheat Code Central. December 6, 2013. Retrieved December 15, 2013.
 Tan, Nicholas December 16, 2013. Best ActionAdventure Game 2013. Game Revolution. Retrieved January 17, 2014.
 Bischoff, Daniel December 17, 2013. Best Publisher 2013. Game Revolution. Retrieved January 17, 2014.
 PS3 Game of the Year 2013 Winner. GameSpot. December 13, 2013. Retrieved December 13, 2013.
 Xbox 360 Game of the Year 2013 Winner. GameSpot. December 15, 2013. Retrieved December 15, 2013.
 2013 Best Adventure Game. Hardcore Gamer. December 21, 2013. Retrieved December 26, 2013.
 2013 The Sequel of Sequels. Hardcore Gamer. December 21, 2013. Retrieved December 26, 2013.
 Top 10 Games of the Year. Hardcore Gamer. December 23, 2013. Retrieved December 26, 2013.
 2013 Best Multiplatform Game. Hardcore Gamer. December 21, 2013. Retrieved December 26, 2013.
 2013 Best Multiplayer Game. Hardcore Gamer. December 21, 2013. Retrieved December 26, 2013.
 2013 Best New Character. Hardcore Gamer. December 21, 2013. Retrieved December 26, 2013.
 2013 Best Technical Graphics. Hardcore Gamer. December 21, 2013. Retrieved December 26, 2013.
 The winner of Destructoids best 2013 multiplatform game. Destructoid. December 24, 2013. Retrieved December 26, 2013.
 The winner of Destructoids best of 2013 action game. Destructoid. December 24, 2013. Retrieved December 26, 2013.
 The winner of Destructoids best of 2013 competitive game. Destructoid. December 24, 2013. Retrieved December 26, 2013.
 Giant Bomb Staff December 23, 2013. Giant Bombs 2013 Game of the Year Awards: Day One. Giant Bomb. Retrieved January 17, 2014.
 Giant Bomb Staff December 27, 2013. Giant Bombs 2013 Game of the Year Awards: Day Five. Giant Bomb. Retrieved January 17, 2014.
 admin January 8, 2014. 2013 NAVGTR Nominations. National Academy of Video Game Trade Reviewers. Retrieved January 17, 2014.
 2013 GameTrailers Game of the Year Awards Video  Winners Montage. GameTrailers. January 7, 2014. Retrieved January 17, 2014.
 Best PS4 Multiplayer Game  IGNs Best of 2013. IGN. December 18, 2013. Retrieved December 20, 2013.
 Best Xbox One Game  IGNs Best of 2013. IGN. December 18, 2013. Retrieved December 20, 2013.
 Best Xbox One Action Game  IGNs Best of 2013. IGN. December 18, 2013. Retrieved December 20, 2013.
 Best Xbox One Story  IGNs Best of 2013. IGN. December 18, 2013. Retrieved December 20, 2013.
 Best Wii U ActionAdventure Game  IGNs Best of 2013. IGN. December 18, 2013. Retrieved December 20, 2013.
 Best Wii U Sound  IGNs Best of 2013. IGN. December 18, 2013. Retrieved December 20, 2013.
 Best Overall ActionAdventure Game  IGNs Best of 2013. IGN. December 18, 2013. Retrieved December 20, 2013.
 Best Overall Music  IGNs Best of 2013. IGN. December 18, 2013. Retrieved December 20, 2013.
 Best PC ActionAdventure Game  IGNs Best of 2013. IGN. December 18, 2013. Retrieved December 20, 2013.
 Best PS3 ActionAdventure Game  IGNs Best of 2013. IGN. December 18, 2013. Retrieved December 20, 2013.
 Best PS3 Sound  IGNs Best of 2013. IGN. December 18, 2013. Retrieved December 20, 2013.
 Best PS3 Story  IGNs Best of 2013. IGN. December 18, 2013. Retrieved December 20, 2013.
 Best PS4 Game  IGNs Best of 2013. IGN. December 18, 2013. Retrieved December 20, 2013.
 Best Xbox 360 ActionAdventure Game  IGNs Best of 2013. IGN. December 18, 2013. Retrieved December 20, 2013.
 Best Xbox 360 Sound  IGNs Best of 2013. IGN. December 18, 2013. Retrieved December 20, 2013.
 Best Xbox 360 Story  IGNs Best of 2013. IGN. December 18, 2013. Retrieved December 20, 2013.
 Best Xbox One Sound  IGNs Best of 2013. IGN. December 18, 2013. Retrieved December 20, 2013.
 Best Wii U Game  IGNs Best of 2013. IGN. December 18, 2013. Retrieved December 20, 2013.
 Best Wii U Multiplayer Game  IGNs Best of 2013. IGN. December 18, 2013. Retrieved December 20, 2013.
 Best Wii U Music  IGNs Best of 2013. IGN. December 18, 2013. Retrieved December 20, 2013.
 The Escapist Staff January 11, 2014. The Escapist Awards  Game of the Year 2013. The Escapist. p. 1. Retrieved January 17, 2014.
 The Escapist Staff January 1, 2014. The Winners of The Escapist Awards and Game of the Year Nominees. The Escapist. p. 6. Retrieved January 17, 2014.
 OXM Staff January 13, 2014. Official Xbox Magazines 2013 Awards: Categories, Genres, and Platforms  Best Action Game. Official Xbox Magazine. Retrieved January 17, 2014.
 OXM Staff January 13, 2014. The OXM 2013 Game of the Year. Official Xbox Magazine. Retrieved January 17, 2014.
 2014 Writers Guild Awards Videogame Nominees Announced. Writers Guild of America, West. January 9, 2014. Archived from the original on January 15, 2014. Retrieved January 19, 2014.
 17th Annual D.I.C.E. Finalists PDF. Academy of Interactive Arts  Sciences. January 17, 2014. Retrieved January 17, 2014.
 14th Annual Game Developers Choice Awards. Game Developers Choice Awards. January 9, 2014. Retrieved January 17, 2014.
 Golden Joystick 2014 Awards Nominees Revealed. Lazy Gamers. Retrieved October 26, 2014.
 Tom Ivan October 25, 2014. Golden Joysticks 2014: Full list of winners. Computer and Video Games. Retrieved October 26, 2014.
 Grubb, Jeffrey. PETA: Its disgraceful for Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag to glorify whaling. Retrieved March 6, 2013.
 Reilly, Luke. PETA Condemns Assassins Creed 4s Whaling as Disgraceful. Retrieved March 5, 2013.
 Thier, Dave 6 March 2013. PETA Attacks Assassins Creed 4 For Including Whaling UPDATE: Ubisoft Responds. Forbes. Retrieved 7 June 2016.
 Lien, Tracey June 9, 2014. Assassins Creed Unity hits Oct. 28, preorders live. Polygon. Retrieved June 9, 2014.
 Karmali, Luke June 9, 2014. E3 2014: Assassins Creed Unity Release Date, Collectors Edition Announced. IGN. Retrieved June 9, 2014.
 McWhertor, Michael August 5, 2014. Assassins Creed Rogue confirmed by Ubisoft  heres the first trailer. Polygon. Retrieved August 5, 2014.
 Piratera, videojuegos y Amaro Pargo
 El pirata canario Amaro Pargo revive con Assassins Creed
 Purchese, Robert June 12, 2017. Ubisoft reveals new pirate game Skull  Bones. Eurogamer. Gamer Network.
External links
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag.
Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Assassins Creed: Brotherhood.
Official website
WPVG icon 2016.svgVideo games portalSamsung Galaxy S5 Vector.svg2010s portal
vte
Assassins Creed
Categories: 2013 video gamesActionadventure gamesAssassins CreedMultiplayer and singleplayer video gamesNaval video gamesNintendo Network gamesOpen world video gamesParkour video gamesPlayStation 3 gamesPlayStation 4 gamesStealth video gamesVideo game prequelsVideo games about piratesVideo games about slaveryVideo games developed in BulgariaVideo games developed in CanadaVideo games developed in ItalyVideo games set in CanadaVideo games set in CubaVideo games set in FloridaVideo games set in HaitiVideo games set in JamaicaVideo games set in MartiniqueVideo games set in MontrealVideo games set in PanamaVideo games set in Saint LuciaVideo games set in the 18th centuryVideo games set in the BahamasVideo games set in the CaribbeanVideo games using PhysXVideo games with downloadable contentWii U eShop gamesWii U gamesPlayStation Plus gamesWindows gamesXbox 360 gamesXbox One gamesCultural depictions of BlackbeardCultural depictions of William KiddCultural depictions of Anne BonnyCultural depictions of Mary ReadVideo games set on islandsHaitian Revolution in fiction

Assassins Creed Rogue
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
Assassins Creed Rogue
Assassins Creed Rogue.jpg
DevelopersUbisoft Sofiaa
PublishersUbisoft
Directors
Mikhail Lozanov
Spass Kroushkov
Martin Capel
ProducersIvan Balabanov
DesignersMartin Capel
ArtistsEddie Bennun
WritersRichard Farrese
ComposersElitsa Alexandrova
SeriesAssassins Creed
EngineAnvilNext
Platforms
PlayStation 3
Xbox 360
Microsoft Windows
PlayStation 4
Xbox One
Release
November 11, 2014show
GenresActionadventure, stealth
ModesSingleplayer
Assassins Creed Rogue is an actionadventure video game developed by Ubisoft Sofia and published by Ubisoft.1 It is the seventh major installment in the Assassins Creed series, and acts as a sequel to 2013s Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag and a prequel to 2012s Assassins Creed III with its final mission being the prologue to 2014s Assassins Creed Unity. It is the last of the Assassins Creed game to be released for PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360, Ubisoft announcing that the company will no longer release games for them, except for its casual rhythm series Just Dance. The game was first released for PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 in November and December 2014 in North America, Australasia, Europe and Japan,1234 and released for Microsoft Windows on March 10, 2015. A remastered version was released for PlayStation 4 and Xbox One on March 20, 2018.5

The plot is set in a fictional history of real world events and follows the centuriesold struggle between the Assassins, who fight for peace with free will, and the Templars, who desire peace through control. The story is set in the mid18th century during the Seven Years War, and follows Shay Patrick Cormac, an AssassinturnedTemplar who hunts down former members of his Brotherhood after being betrayed by them. Gameplay in Rogue is very similar to that of Black Flag with a mixture of shipbased naval exploration and thirdperson landbased exploration with some new features.

Upon release, Rogue received a mixed reception; most critics praised the games twist on the traditional formula by playing as a Templar, the mature storyline, the complex protagonist, the sophisticated depiction of the fight between Templars and Assassins, as well as the additions to the franchises lore and the naval warfare gameplay. Other reviewers criticized it for failing to innovate the series formula and its similarities to Black Flag.


Contents
1Gameplay
2Plot
3Development
4Reception
4.1Sales
5Notes
6References
7External links
Gameplay
Assassins Creed Rogue is an actionadventure, stealth game set in an open world environment and played from a thirdperson perspective. Naval aspects from previous games return with the player controlling Shays ship, the Morrgan. The Morrgan has a shallower draft compared to Edward Kenways Jackdaw from Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag, allowing for river travel.16 New features include new shipbased weapons such as releasing an oil slick which can then be ignited, Puckle guns, and the ability for enemies to board the Morrgan during shiptoship combat. The arctic environment also features into naval gameplay and exploration, as certain icebergs can be rammed with an icebreaker.7 The underwater diving missions featured in Black Flag do not exist as swimming in the North Atlantic causes the players health to rapidly deplete due to the frigid water.8

For combat, the game introduces an air rifle, similar to the blowpipe from the Black Flag which allows the player to silently take out enemies at a distance. The air rifle can be outfitted with a variety of different projectiles, such as firecrackers. The player can also use it as a grenade launcher, which fires off shrapnel grenades and other loads.6 Handtohand combat has been slightly altered, and now enemy attacks can be countered with timing, similar to the Batman: Arkham series of games. Enemy Assassins feature archetypes similar to previous games, using skills that players have been using throughout the series; they can hide in bushes, blend in with crowds, and perform air assassinations against the player.8 Poison gas can now be used as an environmental weapon, and Shay has a mask that can mitigate its effects.

Side missions and activities return, with a number of them based on those of the previous games. Reflecting Shays role as a Templar, the game introduces a new side mission: Assassin Interception. These mirror the Assassination side missions in previous games, in that Shay, after intercepting a messenger pigeon carrying an assassination contract, must prevent an innocent being assassinated by finding and killing Assassins hidden nearby.

Legendary ship battles make a return as well. In order to overcome these challenges, the player may acquire possible upgrades for the Morrgan as the game progresses.

Plot
Shay Patrick Cormac Steven Piovesan is a new recruit to the Colonial Brotherhood of Assassins whose potential is offset by his insubordination. While training with the North Atlantic chapter under the Assassin Mentor Achilles Davenport Roger Aaron Brown, he encounters the Assassin Adwal Tristan D. Lalla, who brings news that the Haitian city of PortauPrince has been devastated by an earthquake during the search for a Precursor temple containing a Piece of Eden. With his experience captaining shipsincluding the recently acquired MorriganCormac is enlisted in an investigation into Templar interests in a Precursor artifact and manuscript that are linked to the temple.

Posing as a Templar courier, he delivers the artifact and manuscript to Benjamin Franklin Rick Jones whose experiments with electricity on the artifact generate a map showing the location of Precursor temples around the world. He identifies one in Lisbon, and Cormac is dispatched by Davenport to retrieve the Piece of Eden it contains. However, Cormac has begun questioning the Assassins motives after seeing their refusal to engage in dialogue with the Templars, and after killing an alreadydying Templar commander, Lawrence Washington. His convictions are destroyed in Lisbon when his efforts to retrieve the Piece of Eden trigger an earthquake, destroying the city. Correctly deducing that a similar sequence of events destroyed PortauPrince, Cormac is horrified to learn that Davenport intends to continue the search for Pieces of Eden despite the danger. Shay then steals the manuscript and attempts to escape the Homestead, but is cornered by members of the Brotherhood. Intending to commit suicide by jumping off the Homesteads cliff, Shay is shot and left for dead before he can destroy the Manuscript.

Now cast adrift, he finds himself in New York City, acting as a vigilante to clean out gangs that are extorting the citizenry. His efforts attract the attention of Colonel George Monro Graham J. Cuthbertson, who convinces Cormac that he can improve the lives of others. Meeting with Christopher Gist, Shay retakes his ship the Morrigan from the Assassins, and agrees to assist his new allies, despite learning that they are Templars. He is disturbed to learn that the Assassins have not given up their search for the Pieces of Eden, and believing them to be a threat, commits himself to the Templar Order to hunt them down. After killing several members of the Colonial Brotherhood of Assassins including Le Chasseur Chimwemwe Miller, Kesegowaase Danny BlancoHall, Adwal, Hope Jensen Patricia Summersett and LouisJoseph Gaultier de La Vrendrye Marcel Jeannin, Shay becomes a fully fledged member of the Order when he is inducted by Grand Master Haytham Kenway Adrian Hough. Finally, only two senior members of the Assassins in America remain alive: Achilles himself, and his secondincommand Liam OBrien Julian Casey, once Shays best friend. Shay pursues the two to the Arctic with Haytham, where the Assassins have located another Temple. Having dispatched most of the Assassin expedition, Shay and Haytham enter the Temple to find Liam and Achilles, who have realized that the artifact is as Shay saida means to stabilize the world, not a weapon to control it. However, Achilles attempt to stop Liam taking vengeance causes the artifact to be destroyed, and a third earthquake is triggered. As the four try to escape, Shay and Liam duel on the ice, and Liam is fatally injured when the two fall. Shay then makes his way back to his ship, and arrives as Haytham overpowers Achilles. Shay persuades Haytham to spare Achilles, out of mercy and to ensure knowledge of the Temples will not be lost, so the Assassins will not try to pursue them again. Haytham then cripples the last American Assassin with his pistol.

As the Templars set sail for home, Haytham tasks Shay with retrieving the Precursor artifact. Shay spends much of his later life hunting it down, even as Templar influence in the colonies was eventually destroyed by Connor during the American Revolution. The final memories gradually reveal a mission to escort Benjamin Franklin through Paris, in search of the Precursor box that is in the possession of Charles Dorian, a French Assassin and the father of Arno Dorian, the protagonist of Assassins Creed Unity. Cormac murders Dorian and takes possession of the box as he becomes a senior member of the Templar Order.

In the present day, the player is researching Cormacs memories for Abstergo Entertainment when they inadvertently trip a hidden memory file that infects the Animus servers. Abstergo is placed in lockdown, and the player must clean the Animus servers out by living Cormacs later memories. Juhani Otso Berg, a senior member of the Templars, later orders the player to upload Shays memories to the Assassin servers in order to weaken their resolve by showing how close Achilles Davenport came to destroying the world and the Assassins betraying Shay. The Brotherhood responds by cutting off their communications. In a midcredits scene, Berg thanks the player for their help, and gives them a choice: join the Templar order, or die. The scene fades to black before the players decision is shown.

Development
By March 2014, an Assassins Creed game codenamed Comet was revealed to be in development, set for release on PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360.9 By the end of the month, additional reports indicated that Comet would be set around 1758 in New York, as well as feature sailing on the Atlantic Ocean. The game would be a direct sequel to Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag, and would feature a Templar named Shay as the main protagonist. Haytham Kenway from Assassins Creed III and Adwal from Black Flag would also make appearances.10

The game was officially announced on August 5, 2014, following a leak of the title.11 Game director Martin Capel described the game as finishing the series North American saga and that the game was designed to accommodate specific fan requests, such as taking on the role of a Templar.1 The game is intended to fill the gaps of the story between Assassins Creed III and Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag and has a crucial link to the events of the previous games.12 In addition to Ubisoft Sofias work on the game, contributions are also being made by Ubisoft studios in Singapore, Montreal, Quebec, Chengdu, Milan and Bucharest.1 Ubisoft also stated that the game was being envisioned without multiplayer components at this stage, but did not rule out any modes being added after the game launched.13 On 20 March 2018, the 4k remaster of the game was released for PlayStation 4 and Xbox One.14

Reception
Reception
Aggregate score
AggregatorScore
MetacriticPC 7410015
PS3 7210016
X360 7210017
Review scores
PublicationScore
Destructoid5.51018
EGM8.51019
Eurogamer81020
Game Informer8.251021
GameSpot61022
GamesRadar2.55 stars23
GameTrailers7.21024
IGN6.81025
Joystiq35 stars26
VideoGamer.com71027
Assassins Creed Rogue received mixed or average reviews from critics, according to review aggregator Metacritic.15161728

Ray Carsillo from Electronic Gaming Monthly gave the game an 8.510, praising its interesting lead character, enjoyable story, new weapons introduced, new mission design, which requires players to prevent assassinations instead of carrying out assassinations like in other Assassins Creed titles, as well as advanced and improved combat mechanics. However, he criticized poor pacing of the story, frequent bugs, lack of replayability and the lack of inclusion of a multiplayer mode. He concluded the review by saying that Rogue is a far more pleasurable experience than I anticipated. It does just enough to put its own stamp on the franchise while also giving us critical story details in order to tie up loose ends between Assassins Creed III and IV. It serves as a perfect conclusion to the series time spent exploring Europes North American colonies in the 18th century.19

Eurogamer drew comparisons between Rogue and Assassins Creed Revelationsa game which served to resolve storylines from Ezio Auditores saga as a leadin to Assassins Creed III, due to its focus on expanding on characters and storylines introduced in III and Black Flag. Although noting that some settings, weapons, and mechanics had been reused from previous games in the series such as an expansion of the New York City setting from III, naval combat, renovating buildings to build income, and locating enemies with a radar similarly to the former multiplayer mode, the use of Assassins as an enemy was considered to be a muchneeded new idea to the series fighting mechanics due to their use of tactics that were used by the player themselves in previous games such as smoke bombs and hiding, and that Rogue felt the most fresh whilst exploring its new North Atlantic overworld. However, the story missions themselves and single player campaign overall were criticized for being noticeably shorter than in previous games.29

Matt Miller from Game Informer gave the game an 8.2510. He praised the huge variety of activities, varied environments and mission types, new additions and wellperformed gameplay, despite being too similar to its predecessors. He criticized the repetitive melee combat and the absence of multiplayer mode. He described the game by saying that Rogue is vast with lots to explore, and while it lacks novelty, it offers a wealth of gameplay and lore to faithful fans.21 Daniel Bloodworth from GameTrailers gave the game a 7.210, praising the return of some old characters in the Assassins Creed series, stunning scenery and environment, interesting interceptions missions, but criticizing the predictable and dull lead character, poorlyconstructed missions in the beginning of the game, disappointing boss battles, as well as numerous bugs. He described the game by saying that Rogue in many ways feels like an extension of last years Black Flag, even down to the menus, but there are some tweaks to the formula thanks to your new role as a former assassin, hunting down his old comrades.24

Daniel Krupa from IGN gave the game a 6.810. He praised the engaging story, the nuanced lead character, atmospheric scenery, but criticized the lack of Templar abilities included, bland encounters with other main characters, uninspired side quests, empty world, as well as the frustrating combat and traversal system, which he stated has shown no improvements. He also criticized the game for not encouraging the player to explore the world.25 Mark Walton from GameSpot gave the game a 610, criticizing the predictable story, unlikeable lead character, lack of interesting missions, as well as being thin on core content. He stated that the game feels like a glorified Black Flag DLC pack and has done nothing to put the franchise forward.22 Xav de Matos from Joystiq gave the game a 610, criticizing the game for not adding anything new to the franchise. He stated that Assassins Creed Rogue is essentially a clone of Black Flags setting and systems. If you can accept rampant copyandpaste in another full priced entry, youll more than likely enjoy what Assassins Creed Rogue has to offer.26

In December 2015, Game Informer ranked the game as the sixth best game in the Assassins Creed series to date.30

Sales
As of December 31, 2014, Ubisoft had shipped a combined 10 million copies of Assassins Creed Unity and Assassins Creed Rogue.313233

Notes
 Additional work by Ubisoft Singapore, Ubisoft Montreal, Ubisoft Quebec, Ubisoft Kiev, Ubisoft Chengdu, Ubisoft Milan and Ubisoft Bucharest.
References
 McWhertor, Michael August 5, 2014. Assassins Creed Rogue confirmed by Ubisoft  heres the first trailer. Polygon. Retrieved August 5, 2014.
 Ta, Zorine November 9, 2014. AU New Releases: Assassins Creed Unity Released for PS4, Xbox One, and PC. GameSpot. Retrieved November 9, 2014.
 YinPoole, Wesley October 13, 2014. PC gamers get Assassins Creed Rogue early 2015. Eurogamer. Retrieved November 9, 2014.
 Chalk, Andy February 5, 2015. Assassins Creed: Rogue system requirements and release date revealed. PC Gamer. Retrieved February 6, 2015.
 Reparaz, Mikel January 11, 2018. Assassins Creed Rogue Remastered coming March 20 to PS4 and Xbox One. Ubisoft. Archived from the original on 20180226. Retrieved January 12, 2018.
 Cork, Jeff August 6, 2014. Get To Know Shay From Assassins Creed Rogue. Game Informer. Game Stop. Retrieved August 6, 2014.
 Nunneley, Stephany August 5, 2014. Assassins Creed Rogue puts you behind the ships wheel again this fall. VG 247. Retrieved August 6, 2014.
 Silva, Marty August 14, 2014. Gamescom 2014: Assassins Creed Rogue: Dark, Angry, And Out For Blood. IGN. Retrieved August 15, 2014.
 Schreier, Jason March 19, 2014. Leaked Images Reveal One Of This Falls Two Assassins Creed Games. Kotaku. Retrieved March 19, 2014.
 Schreier, Jason March 27, 2014. Sources: Assassins Creed Comet Will Let You Play As A Templar. Kotaku. Retrieved March 27, 2014.
 Tach, Dave August 5, 2014. Assassins Creed Rogue apparently revealed in leaked trailer confirmed. Polygon. Retrieved August 5, 2014.
 Wallace, Kimberly August 5, 2014. September Cover Revealed  Assassins Creed Rogue And Unity. Game Informer. GameStop. Retrieved August 5, 2014.
 Pitcher, Jenna August 8, 2014. Assassins Creed Rogue SinglePlayer Only At This Stage. IGN. Retrieved August 10, 2014.
 Assassins Creed Rogue 4K remaster coming to PS4, Xbox One update. Polygon. Retrieved 20180420.
 Assassins Creed Rogue for PC Reviews. Metacritic. Retrieved November 11, 2014.
 Assassins Creed Rogue for PlayStation 3 Reviews. Metacritic. Retrieved November 11, 2014.
 Assassins Creed Rogue for Xbox 360 Reviews. Metacritic. Retrieved November 11, 2014.
 Makedonski, Brett November 13, 2014. Review: Assassins Creed Rogue. Destructoid. Retrieved November 13, 2014.
 Carsillo, Ray November 19, 2014. EGM Review: Assassins Creed Rogue. Electronic Gaming Monthly. Retrieved November 19, 2014.
 Bramwell, Tom November 20, 2014. Assassins Creed Rogue review. Eurogamer. Retrieved November 20, 2014.
 Miller, Matt November 11, 2014. Familiar Territory From A New Perspective  Assassins Creed Rogue  Xbox 360. Game Informer. Retrieved November 11, 2014.
 Walton, Mark November 15, 2014. Assassins Creed Rogue Review: Dj vu. GameSpot. Retrieved November 15, 2014.
 Reed, Ashley November 13, 2014. Assassins Creed Rogue review. GamesRadar. Retrieved November 13, 2014.
 Bloodworth, Daniel November 18, 2014. Assassins Creed Rogue review. GameTrailers. Retrieved November 18, 2014.
 Krupa, Daniel November 15, 2014. Assassins Creed Rogue review: Looking Backwards. IGN. Retrieved November 15, 2014.
 de Matos, Xav November 28, 2014. Assassins Creed Rogue review: Avast ye, clone!. Joystiq. Retrieved November 28, 2014.
 Trinca, Jamie November 14, 2014. Assassins Creed: Rogue Review. VideoGamer.com. Retrieved November 14, 2014.
 Ubisoft reports third quarter 201415 sales PDF. Ubisoft. February 13, 2015. Archived PDF from the original on February 13, 2015. Retrieved February 13, 2015.
 Assassins Creed: Rogue is more than the cashgrab it could have been. Eurogamer. Retrieved 20 March 2015.
 Juba, Joe December 4, 2015. Ranking The Entire Assassins Creed Series. Game Informer. GameStop. Retrieved December 5, 2015.
 Makuch, Eddie 12 February 2015. Assassins Creed Unity and Rogue Sales Revealed. GameSpot. Retrieved 16 November 2017.
 Lemon, Marshall 13 February 2015. Assassins Creed Unity and Rogue Sold Very Well. Escapist Magazine. Retrieved 16 November 2017.
 Philips, Tom 13 February 2015. Assassins Creed Unity and Rogue shipped 10m copies combined. Eurogamer. Retrieved 16 November 2017.
External links
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Assassins Creed Rogue.
Official website
WPVG icon 2016.svgVideo games portalSamsung Galaxy S5 Vector.svg2010s portal
vte
Assassins Creed
Video games
Main series
Assassins Creed II Brotherhood Revelations III IV: Black Flag Rogue Unity Syndicate Origins Odyssey
Other games
Altars Chronicles Bloodlines II: Discovery III: Liberation Identity Chronicles
Adaptations
Novels Lineage The Fall The Chain Brahman Trial by Fire Embers Film
Characters
Desmond Miles Altar IbnLaAhad Ezio Auditore da Firenze
Related
Prince of Persia Watch Dogs Skull  Bones Soulcalibur V
Category Category
Categories: 2014 video gamesAssassins CreedActionadventure gamesOpen world video gamesPlayStation 3 gamesPlayStation 4 gamesStealth video gamesVideo games about revengeVideo games developed in BulgariaVideo games developed in CanadaVideo games developed in ItalyVideo games developed in RomaniaVideo games set in CanadaVideo games set in MontrealVideo games set in New York CityVideo games set in ParisVideo games set in PortugalVideo games set in the 18th centuryVideo games set in the United StatesVideo games with downloadable contentWindows gamesXbox 360 gamesXbox One games

Assassins Creed Unity
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
Assassins Creed Unity
Acunity.jpg
DevelopersUbisoft Montreala
PublishersUbisoft
Directors
Alexandre Amancio
Marc Albinet
Producers
Vincent Pontbriand
Antoine Vimal du Monteil
Philippe Ducharme
DesignersAlexandre Pedneault
ProgrammersJames Therien
ArtistsMohamed Gambouz
Writers
Sylvain Bernard
Alexandre Amancio
Travis Stout
Russell Lees
Darby McDevitt
Ceri Young
Composers
Chris Tilton
Sarah Schachner
Ryan Amon
SeriesAssassins Creed
EngineAnvilNext 2.0
Platforms
Microsoft Windows
PlayStation 4
Xbox One
Release
NA: November 11, 2014
PAL: November 13, 2014
UK: November 14, 2014
GenresActionadventure, stealth
ModesSingleplayer, multiplayer
Assassins Creed Unity is an actionadventure video game developed by Ubisoft Montreal and published by Ubisoft. It was released in November 2014 for Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 4 and Xbox One. It is the eighth major installment in the Assassins Creed series, and the successor to 2013s Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag. It also has ties to Assassins Creed Rogue which was released for the previous generation consoles, the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 on the same date.

The plot is set in a fictional history of real world events and follows the centuriesold struggle between the Assassins, who fight for peace with free will, and the Templars, who desire peace through control. The story is set in Paris during the French Revolution; the singleplayer story follows Arno Victor Dorian in his efforts to expose the true powers behind the Revolution. The game retains the series thirdperson open world exploration as well as introducing a revamped combat, parkour and stealth system. The game also introduces cooperative multiplayer to the Assassins Creed series, letting up to four players engage in narrativedriven missions and explore the open world map.

Assassins Creed Unity received mixed reviews upon its release. Praise was directed towards its visuals, improved gameplay, customization options, multiplayeroriented format, mission design, setting, characterization, and narrative. However, the game was criticized for a lack of gameplayinnovation, unrefined controls, and numerous graphical issues and bugs upon release. Because of the games poor launch owing to the technical issues, Ubisoft issued an apology, and offered compensation.1

Assassins Creed Unity was followed by Assassins Creed Syndicate, which takes place in Victorian England, and was released in October 2015.


Contents
1Gameplay
2Synopsis
2.1Characters
2.2Setting
2.3Plot
2.3.1Dead Kings
3Development
3.1Historical consulting
4Release
5Controversies
5.1Gender options in cooperative mode
5.2Platform parity
6Reception
6.1Critical reception
6.2Ubisofts responses
6.3Criticism by French Left Party
6.4Sales
7Notes
8References
9External links
Gameplay
Assassins Creed Unity is an actionadventure2 stealth game set in an open world environment. The game was meant to be rebuilt, with fencing being used as an inspiration for the new system. In addition to returning weapons from previous games, Assassins Creed Unity introduces the Phantom Blade. The Phantom Blade uses the mechanics of a crossbow to fire a silent projectile at a great distance, while still serving the same role as the Hidden Blade in previous Assassins Creed games.3 Navigation for the game was also overhauled: new Freerun up and Freerun down commands were added to make it easier for the player to scale buildings in either direction. Additionally, Arno learns new moves throughout the game, but the player can also purchase new skills as well.4 With the updated, larger crowds, new interactions with them are also available. The crowd regularly presents many activities, appearing organically, that the player can then choose to engage in at their leisure. Examples include scaring a group of bullies by pulling out a weapon, settling a disagreement between two civilians by killing one of them, which is usually a Templar, or chasing down a thief who has just pick pocketed somebody.5

For the first time, the series allows players to customize the characters abilities, adopting a skill tree that enables players to assign points earned through gameplay to improve their skills in stealth, melee, and ranged combat, and health.6 Players are also able to customise their weapons, armour and equipment to further complement their individual style of play.7 Players also have a wider selection of weapons available, including swords, axes, spears, rifles, pistols and throwable items, such as smoke bombs.8 The expansion DLC, Assassins Creed Dead Kings, adds the formidable guillotine gun.

Assassins Creed Unity also introduces cooperative multiplayer to the series. Players can enter taverns, which act as social hubs in the game, where you can see if any friends are playing the game at the current time. If they are currently in a mission, they will appear as a ghost version of their player, allowing you to approach it to request to join their mission. If accepted, you are transitioned to their game and both of you reset to the most recent checkpoint, and continue on from there. Up to four players can join together in this fashion. The player will take on the role of Arno, customized within their own game, with other players appearing as their own customized version of Arno in their own sets of equipment, weapons, and armor. Many missions and activities will be available for cooperative play which the player can also complete on their own, but there are some story missions that are single player only.5

There are significant tieins with the Assassins Creed Unity Companion App, a freemium click app with limited direct ties to the overall story of Unity. There are a significant number of chests, assassination targets, and other collectibles that are visible to all players but only accessible to those who have completed certain goals within the app. Following an update in February 2015, this requirement is no longer necessary, meaning players who have downloaded the update, can now collect all the chests in the game without having to play the companion app.91011

Synopsis
Characters
Main article: List of Assassins Creed characters
The main character of the game is Arno Dorian Dan Jeannotte,1213 a native Frenchman who was born in Versailles to an Assassin father. After his father is killed by Shay Patrick Cormac at the end of Assassins Creed Rogue, Arno is adopted, unaware that his new family holds a senior position within the Templar Order, with his new father figure being the Templar Grandmaster.51415 Arno blames himself when his adoptive father is murdered, and so sets out on a quest of redemption that brings him into the Brotherhood of Assassins, where he slowly rises through the ranks, much like Altar IbnLaAhad and Ezio Auditore da Firenze as seen in previous games.515 Arnos love interest is a Templar named Elise De LaSerre Catherine Brub,16 the daughter of the Templar Grandmaster who adopted Arno, who also sets out to investigate more about her fathers death and its role in a growing ideological change within the Templar Order that threatens its core values.141517 Additional characters include Marquis de Sade Alex Ivanovici, Napoleon Bonaparte Brent Skagford and Maximilien de Robespierre Bruce Dinsmore.16

Setting
Arnos story starts in Versailles as a child, but for most of the story he is in Paris. His adventure in Paris starts on the eve of the French Revolution in 1789, and extends up to the Thermidorian Reaction in 1794.12 The modern day setting focuses on the Assassins contacting the player and requesting their help to explore Arno in the past, as well as helping in the present.18 Cooperative multiplayer missions follow the development of the Brotherhood of Assassins during the French Revolution.14 In addition, time anomalies are introduced during the story. Accessing them takes Arno to various points of Parisian history, such as Paris Belle poque, or its occupation by Nazi Germany during World War II.19

Plot
The Initiate is a player of Helix, a gaming device produced by Abstergo that allows access to many different genetic memories.

The story begins with the player playing through a memory of the sacking of the Paris Temple, and the capture of Templar Grand Master Jacques de Molay, in 1307. During the sack, de Molay entrusts another Templar with a sword and a book, which the Templar hides within a French crypt shortly before being killed by an Assassin. The memory then fast forwards to de Molays death at the stake, and his curse towards King Phillip IV and Pope Clement V.

At this point, Bishop from the modern day Assassin Brotherhood hijacks the memory sequence and implores the player to join them as an initiate. Bishop provides an internal Abstergo video memo, in which Abstergo describes the capture of a Sage who contains precursor DNA which is in a triplerather than a doublehelix. Abstergo goes into detail regarding the Phoenix Project, whereby Abstergo hopes to use the Sage to compile a whole precursor genome for unclear purposes. Bishop provides access to another memory segment and directs the new initiate to locate another Sage, whose corpse they hope to recover.

The memory then segues to Versailles in 1776, as Arno Dorian, a French noblemans son, meets Elise De La Serre, daughter of the Templar Grand Master. After his father is murdered at the palace, Arno is taken in by Grand Master De La Serre; while the Grand Master knows Arnos father was an Assassin, Arno is oblivious. The story then skips forward 13 years, to Elises initiation into the Templar order in 1789. Arno is given a message to deliver to De La Serre, but puts it in his office in order to sneak into the party to meet with Elise. After meeting her, Arno sneaks out, and finds De La Serre murdered in a courtyard. Arno, mistaken to be De La Serres killer, is captured by the gendarmerie and imprisoned in the Bastille. There, he finds apocalyptic writings on the wall and impresses a fellow prisoner, the Assassin Pierre Bellec, with his fighting skills. Bellec invites Arno into the Brotherhood when they escape during the Storming of the Bastille.

Arno returns home first and is turned away by Elise, who reveals that the message Arno was supposed to deliver to her father was a warning of his impending murder, and reveals herself as a Templar. Arno joins the Brotherhood and begs for the opportunity to find and eliminate the other Templars involved in De La Serres death, including Le Roi des Thunes The King of Beggars. He is granted his request by Mirabeau, who was attempting to broker peace between the Orders with De La Serre. During the course of his investigation, Arno rescues FranoisThomas Germain, a silversmith being held hostage by the Templar Grand Master Lafreniere. After killing Lafreniere, who was actually the one trying to warn De La Serre, Arno runs into Elise and realizes that Germain is the Sage, as well as the one who ordered De La Serres murder. The Brotherhood Council begins to question Arnos loyalty as he acts rashly in his pursuit of De La Serres killer.

Realizing that Germains plot is intended to spark a mass revolt against the King of France, Arno assassinates two more central figures, an officer organizing a prisoner revolt Captain Frederic Rouille and another who was hoarding food merchant Marie Levesque to create the impression that the nobility was squandering resources as France starved. Arno also crosses paths with Napoleon Bonaparte, an artillery officer, while searching the Tuileries Palace for letters from the leader of the Assassins, Mirabeau, to King Louis, which the Templars could use as an excuse to purge the Assassins agents across France. Bonaparte later helped him in taking down Captain Rouille, who served under his command during the September Massacres of September 1792. During this time, Arno saves Elise and convinces her to parley with the Brotherhood, as she confesses her own faction of the Templars are being killed by a schism led by the Sage. Mirabeau agrees, hoping to gain a massive favor from the potential future Grand Master of the Templars, and is murdered by Bellec, who intends to purge the Assassin leadership for beginning to agree with Templar beliefs. Refusing to join him, Arno kills Bellec, and escapes from the food riots and the assassination of Levesque shortly thereafter with Elise in a hot air balloon, after which Arno confesses to Elise that he still loves her.

With the Revolution in full swing, Arno tracks Germain to the execution of King Louis XVI, but chooses to stay and protect Elise rather than pursue him. Elise rejects him for the decision, and Arno is exiled from the Brotherhood for ignoring orders to pursue his personal vendetta, causing him to fall into a drunken depression. Arno languishes for several months before he is found in Versailles by Elise who convinces him to return as Paris is tearing itself apart during the Reign of Terror. Arno returns to Paris and, with Elises help, discredits the reputation of Maximilien de Robespierre, whom Germain, now Grand Master of the Templars, had placed in charge of maintaining chaos during the Revolution. After Arno and Elise find Robespierre, who had locked himself in his office in an attempt to avoid arrest, Elise shoots Robespierre in the jaw and makes him write down the location of Germain.

Arno confronts Germain at the top of the Temple, only to find he now has the Sword of Eden. The fight eventually ends in the same Templar crypt in which the game began, where Arno strikes Germain only to have the Sword blow him backwards and trap him under rubble. Elise first attempts to help Arno out of the rubble then goes ahead to take on Germain by herself, but as Arno gets the rubble off of him and runs to protect Elise the Sword explodes, killing Elise and mortally wounding Germain. Arno then kills Germain, who in his memories confirms he is the Sage and that he wanted to purge the Templar Order of all who had forgotten the teachings of de Molay.

The game closes with Arno explaining how his understanding of the Creed has changed, and promising to watch over Paris and keep Elises memory alive. Years later, Arno, having become a Master Assassin, recovers Germains skeleton from the Temple and places it in the Catacombs of Paris, much to the relief of Bishop, who is now confident that Abstergo will not be able to find it.

Dead Kings
One week after Germains death, Arno, still feeling devastated over Elises death, finds refuge in SaintDenis at the time, known as Franciade. He is contacted by the Marquis de Sade at a tavern, who requests his help in finding the manuscript of Nicolas de Condorcet, hidden in the tomb of Louis IX beneath the city, in exchange for a ship that would take Arno to Egypt.

During his search, Arno encounters a group of tomb raiders, led by Captain Philippe Rose, a subordinate of Napoleon Bonaparte, who wishes to retrieve the artifact located within a Precursor temple, buried under the citys church. He also finds that the manuscript has been stolen by a child thief, Lon, who was captured by the raiders. Arno rescues Lon and retrieves the manuscript, but declines to help him stop the raiders. His resolve softens after an encounter with a vision of Elise, as well as hearing Lons pleas.

After discovering the location of the temple, and retrieving the key from one of Napoleons officers, Arno finally manages to open the door to the temple. He is then ambushed by Rose, who attempts to take the artifact for himself. Arno survives the ambush, and makes it to the artifact before Rose and his men. After killing Rose, Arno retrieves the artifact, a headshaped lantern containing a spherical Piece of Eden, and uses it to repel the raiders and escape the temple. He later meets de Sade at the tavern and delivers the manuscript as promised. Finally, Arno decides to stay in France, and contacts the Brotherhood to deliver the Piece of Eden to Egypt, far away from the reach of Bonaparte, who is arrested for desertion and treason.

Development
Development for the game began shortly after the completion of 2010s Assassins Creed: Brotherhood,5 with the core development team splitting off during the early stages of development on Assassins Creed III.20 On March 19, 2014, early screenshots of the game were leaked, as well as its title Unity. The leak revealed that Unity would feature a new location and time period, Paris during the French Revolution, a new assassin, and that it would be released in late 2014 on PlayStation 4 and Xbox One.21 On March 21, Ubisoft confirmed the games existence, having been in development for more than three years, by releasing prealpha game footage. They also confirmed the games release date of Q4 2014, and that it would also see a release on Windows.22 Ubisoft writer Jeffrey Yohalem revealed that the French Revolution setting for the game was deliberately teased, along with Assassins Creed IIIs American Revolution setting, in symbols seen at the end of Brotherhood.23 Ubisoft Montreal is the lead developer for the project, with contributing work from the Ubisoft studios in Toronto, Kiev, Singapore, Shanghai, Annecy, Montpellier, Bucharest, Quebec, and Chengdu.24

At E3 2014, trailers were released for the game, demonstrating the games cooperative multiplayer mode for up to four players, a first for the series.25 The trailer featured Lordes cover of Everybody Wants to Rule the World, which was produced by Michael A. Levine and Lucas Cantor.26 The development team was able to use the new power of the PlayStation 4 and Xbox One to improve the NPC crowds. Up to 1000 individual AI characters can appear in a crowd, each acting independently and reacting to each other as well as the players actions.5 The PC version of the game uses Nvidias GameWorks technology such as TXAA antialiasing, advanced DX11 tessellation and Nvidia PhysX technology, due to a partnership between Ubisoft and Nvidia.2728

Lead game designer Benjamin Plich has said this game will be more difficult than previous entries thanks to the removal of the counter button and more aggressive guards.29 Plich also said that the game will feature synchronized Double Assassinations.30

In August 2014, Assassins Creed Rogue was announced for the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 and was revealed to have ties to the story in Unity.14

The game is written in a combination of C and C, totaling an estimated 15.5 million lines of code of the former, and five million of the latter.31

Historical consulting
On October 6, 2014, Ubisoft announced that they had enlisted the help of academic historians such as Laurent Turcot, professor at Universit du Qubec  TroisRivires for daily life of 18thcentury Paris and Jean Clement Martin professor at the Sorbonne, to revise the script.32

Like other games in the series, Unity features a large number of real world landmarks, such as the Eiffel Tower, the NotreDame Cathedral, and the Statue of Liberty.3334

Release
The game was originally intended to be released worldwide on October 28, 2014.35 However, on August 28, 2014, it was delayed until November 11, 2014 in North America, November 13, 2014 in Europe and Australasia, and November 14, 2014 in the United Kingdom.3637 On the delay, Vincent Pontbriand, senior producer at Ubisoft, said, As we got close to the finish, we realized we were near the target but still needed a bit more time to hone some of the details to make sure Assassins Creed Unity is exceptional. Additionally, the game received a day one patch with further updates to the game.38

Controversies
Gender options in cooperative mode
We recognize the valid concern around diversity in video game narrative. Assassins Creed is developed by a multicultural team of various faiths and beliefs and we hope this attention to diversity is reflected in the settings of our games and our characters. Assassins Creed Unity is focused on the story of the lead character, Arno. Whether playing by yourself or with the coop Shared Experiences, you the gamer will always be playing as Arno, complete with his broad range of gear and skill sets that will make you feel unique. With regard to diversity in our playable Assassins, weve featured Aveline, Connor, Adewale and Altar in Assassins Creed games and we continue to look at showcasing diverse characters. We look forward to introducing you to some of the strong female characters in Assassins Creed Unity.
Ubisofts response to the allmale character models for the cooperative mode.39
After the cooperative multiplayer mode was revealed at E3 2014, additional information about the mode was revealed by creative director Alex Amancio and technical director James Therien. Amancio stated that the mode did not include the ability to play as a female avatar, due to the reality of production. Amancio added by saying, Its double the animations, its double the voices, all that stuff and double the visual assets. Especially because we have customizable assassins. It was really a lot of extra production work, which was echoed by Therien. Level designer Bruno StAndr expanded on this by stating that an estimated 8,000 additional animations would have had to be recreated for a female avatar.4041

This caused dissatisfaction in some video game community outlets. Brenna Hillier of VG247 noted how there were nine development teams working on the game, and said Ubisoft has here trotted out a tired, stupid, constantly refuted excuse for why it has perpetuated the cycle of sexism and underrepresentation in the games industry.42 Tim Clark of PC Gamer made note that previous Assassins Creed games have had playable women as part of the multiplayer component, and that Brotherhood had you supported by oncall assassins, many of whom were female, so its hardly like it cant be done. Clark also looked to the way Amancio and Therien answered the question and felt how they referenced how much the team wanted to include playable female characters suggests... that this is probably a decision which hasnt gone down well internally.43 Former Assassins Creed designer Jonathan Cooper responded by saying, In my educated opinion, I would estimate this to be a day or twos work. Not a replacement of 8,000 animations. He also revealed that Aveline de Grandpr, the female protagonist of Assassins Creed III: Liberation, shares more of Connor Kenways animations than Edward Kenway does.44 Fans also created petitions urging Ubisoft to change their stance.45 Additionally, former Assassins Creed game designer Patrice Dsilets commented that Amancios reasoning was valid, but that Ubisoft should put in the effort to let players have gender options.46

Amancio attempted to clear up any confusion, by stating, I understand the issue, I understand the cause, and it is a noble one, but I dont think its relevant in the case of Unity. In Unity you play this character called Arno, and when youre playing coop youre also playing Arno  everybody is. Its like Aiden Pearce in Watch Dogs... Arno has different skills  you select skill points in the game, there are gear elements that have an impact and all these weapons that make the character you make your own. But youre always playing Arno... The reason were just changing the face and keeping the bodies is we want people to show off the gear that they pick up in the game through exploration. Thats why we kept that.45

Platform parity
In October 2014, Ubisofts senior producer Vincent Pontbriand made a statement that all console versions of the game would be locked at the same resolution of 900p. This was done ...to avoid all the debates and stuff.47 Many readers took this in reference to how the PlayStation 4 and Xbox One are constantly compared in the media for raw power, presuming that the PlayStation 4 version of the games resolution was lowered to reach parity with the Xbox Ones, but Ubisoft later denied that this was the reason.48

Instead, Pontbriand stated that the decision for parity came from the limitations of the consoles CPUs. The number of NPCs and general amount of AI was paramount to keeping the game locked at 30 frames per second.49

Reception
Critical reception
Reception
Aggregate score
AggregatorScore
MetacriticXONE 7210050
PC 7010051
PS4 7010052
Review scores
PublicationScore
Destructoid71053
Eurogamer71054
Game Informer81055
GameSpot71056
GamesRadar45 stars57
GameTrailers81058
Giant Bomb25 stars59
IGN7.81060
Joystiq2.55 stars61
OXM UK81062
PC Gamer US6510063
Polygon6.51064
VideoGamer.com81065
Assassins Creed Unity received mixed or average reviews from critics upon release, according to review aggregator Metacritic.515052

Matt Miller from Game Informer gave the game 810, praising the detailed environment and architecture, decent voice acting, strategyrequired missions, challenging gameplay and wellpaced story missions, but criticizing the controls and balance, as well as gamebreaking technical issues. He also stated that both the navigation system and the combat system still needed to be improved.55 Louise Blain from GamesRadar gave the game 45, praising the dense and atmospheric game world, characterfocused mission design, overhauled freerunning mechanics, indepth character customization and satisfying combat. However, she criticized the games framerate and poor enemy AI design.57

Chris Carter from Destructoid gave the game 710, praising the new movement system, likable lead characters, iconic setting, smooth animation and improved draw distance. New additions such as character customization and huge crowds were also praised. However, he criticized the predictable story, technical issues, and the mission design of coop multiplayer, as it is impossible to play some missions solo. He stated that Unity feels like a step back. ... It lacks that grand sense of roaming the uncharted seas in Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag, or even the openended feel of the wilderness in Assassins Creed III, but its a journey worth taking if youre already into the series.53 Tom Bramwell from Eurogamer gave the game 710, praised the setting, rich content, inspiring story and interesting sidemissions. However, he criticized the overfamiliar and unimaginative missiondesign, overzealous autocorrect system in the freerunning mechanics and the lack of weapon customization. He described the game as a missed opportunity.54

Marty Silva from IGN gave the game 7.810, praising the recreation of Paris and ambitious ideas presented in the multiplayer, but criticizing the unrefined stealth, weak story and lack of a strong lead character. He stated that the true newgen Assassins Creed game is a gorgeous, entertaining, and successful proof of concept for what lies ahead for the series, though it isnt what Id call revolutionary.60

Tom Senior from PC Gamer gave the game 65100, saying that Unity could become a perfectly enjoyable part of the Assassins Creed canon. Its a solid campaign elevated by quality assassination missions and an extraordinary setting that might just push the big number at the bottom of this review into the 80s, but with a big selling point out of operation, a raft of technical issues, performance problems, microtransactions and stilted combat and freerunning systems, Unityin its current statecan only be considered a failed revolution.63 Sam Prell from Joystiq gave the game 2.55, saying that Its hard not to appreciate everything that it Unity gets right, and youll have a good time if you can wrangle some friends for coop, but its impossible to ignore where Unity falls tragically short.61 PC World stated that the game is a new low for the Assassins Creed series.66 The review also criticized Assassins Creed Unity for its small scale, poor gameplay, and high minimum system requirements. Similarly, CNET stated that while it will likely suffice for Assassins Creed core fans, Unity stumbles throughout and never really finds its footing.67

In December 2015, Game Informer ranked the game as the eighth best game in the Assassins Creed series to date.68

Ubisofts responses
Ubisoft Montreal CEO Yannis Mallat apologized on behalf of the studio with regard to the poor launch of Unity, stating that the overall quality of the game was diminished by bugs and unexpected technical issues, and prevented users from experiencing the game at its fullest potential. In response to the issues, Ubisoft announced that it would halt sales of the games season pass and Gold Edition, and offer the games first DLC campaign, Dead Kings, for free. As compensation, those who bought the season pass received a free digital download of one of six Ubisoft games Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag, The Crew, Far Cry 4, Just Dance 2015, Rayman Legends, or Watch Dogs, and would also continue to have access to a variety of additional content for Unity, including Assassins Creed Chronicles: China.6970 To claim the game, however, users had to forfeit their right to sue Ubisoft with regard to the game and the devaluation of the season pass.71

In February 2016 Ubisoft announced that it would not be announcing any additional Assassins Creed games for the rest of the year, citing the many issues of Unity and stating that, weve learned a lot based on your feedback. In this statement, Ubisoft pledged its commitment to evolve the games mechanics in order to create more enjoyable games.72 This news has possible connections to Ubisofts third quarter financial report, which was released on the same day, and states that Assassins Creed Syndicate had a slower launch than expected.73

Criticism by French Left Party
The French Left Party and its frontman JeanLuc Mlenchon criticized the historical interpretation the game was conveying about the French Revolution, depicting Robespierre as a bloodthirsty monster and Marie Antoinette as a poor little girl.74 He has described Ubisofts version of the historical period as propaganda that builds upon the growing sense of selfhatred spreading throughout France. Mlenchon has expressed his criticisms in multiple media appearances, telling the New York Times that, Smearing the great revolution is dirty work that aims to instill the French with even more selfloathing and talk of decline. If we continue like this, no common identity will remain possible for the French besides religion and skin color. 75

Alexis Corbire, national secretary of the Left Party, said that the game was conveying all the counterrevolutionary clichs that have been forged for two centuries.76 He added To everyone whos gonna buy Assassins Creed Unity, I wish you a nice time. But I also tell you that having fun doesnt prevent you from thinking. Just play it, but dont let yourself be manipulated by the propaganda.77

Without mentioning the criticism specifically, in an interview published on October 6, 2014 by Time, the games creative director Alex Amancio said What we actually try to do, and I think this is just a personal belief that we have, is to avoid reducing history... We try very hard to portray things as factually as possible.78 Despite this, game producer Antoine Vimal du Monteil answered that, ultimately, Assassins Creed Unity is a mainstream video game, not a history lesson.79

Sales
As of December 31, 2014, Ubisoft has shipped a combined 10 million copies of Assassins Creed Unity and Assassins Creed Rogue.80

Notes
 Additional work by Ubisoft Annecy, Ubisoft Kiev, Ubisoft Quebec, Ubisoft Singapore, Ubisoft Toronto, and Ubisoft Shanghai.
References
 Ubisoft Apologizes for Assassins Creed Unity With Free DLC. Kotaku. Retrieved January 28, 2018.
 Best Xbox One ThirdPerson Games. GameSpot. Retrieved January 28, 2018.
 Assassins Creed Unity DevBlog  Combat with Alex Pedneault. Assassins Creed. June 10, 2014. Retrieved June 12, 2014.
 Assassins Creed Unity DevBlog  Navigation with Max Spielberg. Assassins Creed. June 11, 2014. Retrieved June 12, 2014.
 Miller, Matt June 11, 2014. Ten Things You Need To Know About Assassins Creed Unity. Game Informer. GameStop. Retrieved June 12, 2014.
 Hawkins, Josh. Assassins Creed Unity Character Customization  Outfits, Boosts and Equipment. Prima Games. Retrieved November 30, 2014.
 Assassins Creed Unity: Customize Arnos Skills  Gear. assassinscreed.ubi.com. Ubisoft. Retrieved December 1, 2014.
 Weapons. IGN. Retrieved July 3, 2015.
 Nunneley, Stephany. February 18, 2015. Assassins Creed Unity patch drops Companion App requirement. VG247. Retrieved July 3, 2015.
 Mailberg, Emanuel. February 18, 2015. Assassins Creed Unity Patch Removes Companion App Requirements to Gear. GameSpot. Retrieved July 3, 2015.
 Phillips, Tom. February 19, 2015. Assassins Creed Unity patch removes need to play companion app. Eurogamer. Retrieved July 3, 2015.
 Lien, Tracey June 9, 2014. Assassins Creed Unity hits Oct. 28, preorders live. Polygon. Retrieved June 9, 2014.
 Hilliard, Kyle August 13, 2014. The Man Behind Assassins Creed Unitys Arno Dorian On Comedy And MotionCapture MakeOuts. Game Informer. GameStop. Retrieved August 15, 2014.
 Wallace, Kimberly August 5, 2014. September Cover Revealed  Assassins Creed Rogue And Unity. Game Informer. GameStop. Retrieved August 5, 2014.
 Wallace, Kimberly August 13, 2014. Get To Know Arno From Assassins Creed Unity. Game Informer. GameStop. Retrieved August 15, 2014.
 Futter, Mike October 16, 2014. Meet The Actors Behind Assassins Creed Unitys Cast. Game Informer. GameStop. Retrieved October 19, 2014.
 Wallace, Kimberly August 15, 2014. Get To Know Elise From Assassins Creed Unity. Game Informer. GameStop. Retrieved August 16, 2014.
 Peppiatt, Dom. Assassins Creed Unity modern day setting teased. GamesTM. Retrieved June 27, 2014.
 Phillips, Tom October 30, 2014. Assassins Creed Unity features World War 2 section. Eurogamer. Eurogamer. Retrieved November 6, 2014.
 Cork, Jeff August 22, 2014. Assassins Creeds Tech Master Leads Us Through The Series History. Game Informer. GameStop. Retrieved August 22, 2014.
 Schreier, Jason March 19, 2014. Leaked Images Reveal One Of This Falls Two Assassins Creed Games. Kotaku. Retrieved March 19, 2014.
 Karmali, Luke March 21, 2014. Ubisoft Confirms Assassins Creed: Unity, Release Date Teased. IGN. Retrieved March 21, 2014.
 Phillips, Tom March 25, 2014. Assassins Creed: Unity was teased in Brotherhood, writer reveals. Eurogamer. Retrieved June 9, 2014.
 Dyer, Mitch May 15, 2014. 10 Ubisoft Studios Developing Assassins Creed Unity. IGN. Retrieved May 16, 2014.
 Jackson, Leah B. June 9, 2014. E3 2014: Assassins Creed Unity CoOp Revealed. IGN. Retrieved June 9, 2014.
 Assassins Creed Unity trailer. 3 News. MediaWorks New Zealand. June 12, 2014. Archived from the original on June 14, 2014.
 Gera, Emily June 5, 2014. Far Cry 4, Assassins Creed Unity and The Crew will have Hollywoodlevels of animation using Nvidia tech. Polygon. Retrieved June 9, 2014.
 Newhouse, Alex June 6, 2014. Nvidia Working With Ubisoft on Assassins Creed Unity, Far Cry 4 PC. Gamespot. Retrieved June 6, 2014.
 Odoerfer, Mandi August 16, 2014. Assassins Creed Unity Will Be More Challenging Than Previous Games. GeekParty. Retrieved August 17, 2014.
 Assassins Creed August 16, 2014. .MaceonikAC Yeah, you can do Double Assassinations. Even better now because you can synchronize them with three other players! AskACBen. Twitter. Retrieved August 17, 2014.
 Fleury, Nicolas 2014. C in Huge AAA Games. CppCon.
 Beer, Jeff October 22, 2014. The fun, violent History lesson inside Assassins Creed Unity. Retrieved October 27, 2014.
 http:www.jeuxvideo.comnews201400075547lafailletemporelledassassinscreedunity.htm La faille temporelle dAssassins Creed Unity, Jeuxvideo.com
 Tassi, Paul. Assassins Creed Needs To Slow Down And Refocus, Or Risk Total Derailment. Forbes. Retrieved November 11, 2014.
 Phillips, Tom June 9, 2014. Assassins Creed: Unity release date set for October. Eurogamer. Retrieved June 9, 2014.
 Karmali, Luke August 28, 2014. Assassins Creed Unity Release Date Delayed to November. IGN. Retrieved April 9, 2018.
 Saed, Sherif November 7, 2014. Assassins Creed Unity launch trailer is a call for revolution. VG247. Retrieved April 9, 2018.
 Makuch, Eddie August 28, 2014. Assassins Creed Unity Delayed, Now Launching Alongside Assassins Creed Rogue. GameSpot. Retrieved August 28, 2014.
 Narcisse, Evan June 11, 2014. Ubisoft Responds to Assassins Creed Female Character Controversy. Kotaku. Retrieved June 17, 2014.
 Farokhmanesh, Megan June 10, 2014. Ubisoft abandoned women assassins in coop because of the additional work. Polygon. Retrieved June 16, 2014.
 Burns, Steve June 11, 2014. No female leads in Assassins Creed Unity unfortunate but a reality of game development  Ubi. Video Gamer. Retrieved June 17, 2014.
 Hillier, Brenna June 11, 2014. Ubisoft attempts to explain why Assassins Creed: Unitys coop has no playable women. VG247. Retrieved June 17, 2014.
 Clark, Tim June 11, 2014. The lack of playable female characters in Assassins Creed Unity is more than just unfortunate. PC Gamer. Retrieved June 17, 2014.
 Farokhmanesh, Megan June 11, 2014. Animating women should take days, says Assassins Creed 3 animation director. Polygon. Retrieved June 17, 2014.
 Robinson, Martin June 12, 2014. I understand the issue, but its not relevant in Assassins Creed Unity. Eurogamer. Retrieved June 17, 2014.
 McWhertor, Michael June 13, 2014. Desilets: Assassins Creed Unity with four women would have been awesome. Polygon. Retrieved June 17, 2014.
 Assassins Creed Unity Runs at 900p30fps on Xbox One and PS4 to Avoid Debates
 Ubisoft Denies it Lowered PS4 Specs on Assassins Creed Unity
 Performance Analysis: Assassins Creed Unity
 Assassins Creed Unity for Xbox One Reviews. Metacritic. Retrieved November 12, 2014.
 Assassins Creed Unity for PC Reviews. Metacritic. Retrieved November 12, 2014.
 Assassins Creed Unity for PlayStation 4 Reviews. Metacritic. Retrieved November 12, 2014.
 Carter, Chris November 11, 2014. Review: Assassins Creed Unity. Destructoid. Retrieved November 11, 2014.
 Bramwell, Tom November 11, 2014. Assassins Creed Unity review. Eurogamer. Retrieved November 11, 2014.
 Miller, Matt November 11, 2014. Starting From Scratch  Assassins Creed Unity  Xbox One. Game Informer. Retrieved November 11, 2014.
 Walton, Mark November 11, 2014. Assassins Creed Unity Review. GameSpot. Retrieved November 11, 2014.
 Blain, Lousie November 11, 2014. Assassins Creed Unity review. GamesRadar. Retrieved November 11, 2014.
 Jones, Brandon November 11, 2014. Assassins Creed Unity  Review. GameTrailers. Retrieved November 11, 2014.
 Navarro, Alex November 11, 2014. Assassins Creed: Unity Review. Giant Bomb. Retrieved November 11, 2014.
 Sliva, Marty November 11, 2014. Assassins Creed Unity Review. IGN. Retrieved November 11, 2014.
 Prell, S. November 11, 2014. Assassins Creed Unity review: A tale of two games. Joystiq. Retrieved November 11, 2014.
 Gray, Kate November 11, 2014. Review: Assassins Creed Unity Xbox One. Official Xbox Magazine UK. Retrieved November 11, 2014.
 Senior, Tom November 14, 2014. Assassins Creed Unity review. PC Gamer. Retrieved November 14, 2014.
 Gies, Arthur November 11, 2014. Assassins Creed Unity review: Paris burning. Polygon. Retrieved November 11, 2014.
 Trinca, Jamie November 11, 2014. Assassins Creed Unity Review. VideoGamer.com. Retrieved November 11, 2014.
 Dingman, Hayden November 15, 2014. Assassins Creed: Unity review: Let them eat cake. PCWorld. Retrieved November 17, 2014.
 Two steps back. CNET. November 11, 2014. Retrieved November 17, 2014.
 Juba, Joe December 4, 2015. Ranking The Entire Assassins Creed Series. Game Informer. GameStop. Retrieved December 5, 2015.
 Mike Jackson November 27, 2014. Assassins Creed Unity Season Pass discontinued, free game offered. Computer and Video Games. Retrieved November 27, 2014.
 Andy Chalk November 27, 2014. Assassins Creed Unity season pass sales halted, free game offered to owners. PC Gamer. Retrieved November 27, 2014.
 Your Assassins Creed Unity Season Pass Free Game Comes With A Legal Catch. Game Informer. Retrieved December 20, 2014.
 A Message from the Assassins Creed Team  UbiBlog  Ubisoft. UbiBlog  Ubisoft. Retrieved 20160223.
 Frank, Allegra 20160211. No new Assassins Creed game this year, Ubisoft confirms update. Polygon. Retrieved 20160223.
 article on French newspaper lemonde.fr
 Bilefsky, Dan 20141120. Video Game Meets History, and France Rebels Again. The New York Times. ISSN 03624331. Retrieved 20160223.
  ... reprend  son compte tous les poncifs contrervolutionnaires forgs depuis plus deux sicles  article on French newspaper lefigaro.fr
   tous ceux qui vont acheter Assassins Creed Unity, je leur souhaite un moment agrable, mais je leur dis aussi que le plaisir de jouer nempche pas de rflchir. Jouer oui, mais ne vous laissez pas manipuler par ceux qui font de la propagande  article on French newspaper lefigaro.fr
 Matt Peckham October 6, 2014. How Assassins Creed Unity Navigates the French Revolutions Politics. Time. Retrieved December 13, 2014.
  Assassins Creed Unity est un jeu vido grand public, pas une leon dhistoire Article on French news website Arrt sur images.net
 Ubisoft reports third quarter 201415 sales PDF. Ubisoft. February 13, 2015. Archived PDF from the original on February 13, 2015. Retrieved February 13, 2015.
External links
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Assassins Creed Unity.
Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Assassins Creed Unity.
Official website
vte
Assassins Creed
Video games
Main series
Assassins Creed II Brotherhood Revelations III IV: Black Flag Rogue Unity Syndicate Origins Odyssey
Other games
Altars Chronicles Bloodlines II: Discovery III: Liberation Identity Chronicles
Adaptations
Novels Lineage The Fall The Chain Brahman Trial by Fire Embers Film
Characters
Desmond Miles Altar IbnLaAhad Ezio Auditore da Firenze
Related
Prince of Persia Watch Dogs Skull  Bones Soulcalibur V
Category Category
WPVG icon 2016.svgVideo games portalSamsung Galaxy S5 Vector.svg2010s portal
Categories: 2014 video gamesActionadventure gamesAssassins CreedCooperative video gamesFrench Revolution in fictionMultiplayer and singleplayer video gamesOpen world video gamesPlayStation 4 gamesStealth video gamesVideo game controversiesVideo games scored by Cris VelascoVideo games developed in CanadaVideo games set in the 18th centuryVideo games set in FranceVideo games set in ParisVideo games using PhysXVideo games with downloadable contentWindows gamesXbox One games

Assassins Creed Syndicate
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
Assassins Creed Syndicate
ACSyndicate.jpg
DevelopersUbisoft Quebec
PublishersUbisoft
Directors
MarcAlexis Ct
Scott Phillips
Wesley Pincombe
ProducersFranois Pelland
DesignersFrdric StLaurent B.
ProgrammersPierreLuc Cot
ArtistsThierry Dansereau
Writers
Corey May
Jeffrey Yohalem
ComposersAustin Wintory
SeriesAssassins Creed
EngineAnvilNext 2.0
Platforms
PlayStation 4
Xbox One
Microsoft Windows
ReleasePlayStation 4, Xbox One
October 23, 2015
Microsoft Windows
November 19, 2015
GenresActionadventure, stealth
ModesSingleplayer
Assassins Creed Syndicate is an actionadventure video game developed by Ubisoft Quebeca and published by Ubisoft. It was released on October 23, 2015, for PlayStation 4 and Xbox One, and on November 19, 2015, for Microsoft Windows. It is the ninth major installment in the Assassins Creed series, and the successor to 2014s Assassins Creed Unity.

The plot is set in a fictional history of realworld events and follows the centuriesold struggle between the Assassins, who fight for peace with liberty, and the Templars, who desire peace through order. The story is set in Victorian era London and follows twin assassins Jacob and Evie Frye as they navigate the corridors of organized crime, and take back the city from Templar control. The open world design lets players freely roam London.

The game is played from a thirdperson perspective and its world is navigated on foot or by carriage. The game introduces new traveling systems and refined combat and stealth mechanics. Players control the two lead protagoniststwins Jacob and Evie Fryethroughout the games story, switching between them both during and outside of missions. Unlike its direct predecessors, Syndicate does not feature any multiplayer gameplay.

Assassins Creed Syndicate received positive reviews. Critics praised the visuals, the likability of the major characters, especially the Frye twins and the antagonist, the interwoven structure of the sidequests and main objectives, creative mission design, as well as the lightheartedness of the game and the entertaining story. Criticism was directed at the lackluster ending as well as the aging and repetitive gameplay and the lack of diverse charactermodels, yet overall critics agreed that it was a major improvement over Unity.123 Assassins Creed Syndicate was nominated for multiple awards in 2015, including actionadventure of the year 2015 at The Game Awards. It was followed by Assassins Creed Origins, which was released worldwide in October 2017.


Contents
1Gameplay
2Plot
2.1Setting
2.2Story
2.2.1The Dreadful Crimes
2.2.2The Last Maharaja
2.2.3Jack the Ripper
2.2.4Time Anomaly
3Development
3.1Music
4Reception
4.1Sales
4.2Accolades
5Notes
6References
7External links
Gameplay
The player character riding a horse and carriage on a road, with NPCs around. Big Ben can be seen in the background.
Players may travel around the games open world of London on carriages, which can be piloted or occupied
Assassins Creed Syndicate is an actionadventure, stealth game played from a thirdperson perspective, that features similar gameplay elements to the previous games in the series. Players complete questslinear scenarios with set objectivesto progress through the story. Outside of quests, the player can freely roam the open world. Composed of the greater area of Victorian London, consisting of seven boroughs,b the world of Assassins Creed Syndicate is much larger than previous entries in the series.c The player can also perform side missions, which were designed to reflect the fight for power in London, and are cohesive to the games main story.6 In keeping with a historical context that more closely resembles the modern day, the city guard of previous iterations is replaced by a Victorianera police force, who will rarely attack the player unless a crime is committed in their presence; the players main enemy is instead a Templarcontrolled street gang called the Blighters.

The game lets the player control two characters: twins Jacob and Evie Frye.7 Jacob is a hotheaded brawler, specializing in closeranged combat,8 while Evie is strong in stealth and relies on her intelligence and wit.89 Additionally, Evie is the first playable female protagonist of the main series.9d The main weapons of Syndicate include brass knuckles, a compact revolver, a canesword, and the traditional Nepalese curved kukri knife.10 The game also introduces new systems to navigate the world: a rope launcher, which allows the player to rappel up structures, or create a zipline between buildings;11 carriages, which can be piloted or simply occupied by the player, and can be the setting of fights and parkour chases;812 and a train, which serves as the main base for the player throughout the game.13 Unlike its predecessor, the game has no multiplayer mode,14 and does not feature a companion app, which was introduced in Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag.15

Plot
Setting
In 1868, at the tail end of the Second Industrial Revolution, with the Assassin Brotherhood all but eradicated in Victorian London, twins Jacob Paul Amos and Evie Frye Victoria Atkin leave Crawley for London and arrive to find a city controlled by the Templars, with both the Church and the Monarchy losing their power. Raised as Assassins to follow the Creed, Jacob and Evie aim to take back the city from Templar control by infiltrating and uniting Londons criminal underworld,816 aided by notable figures of the era such as novelist Charles Dickens, biologist Charles Darwin, inventor Alexander Graham Bell, political theorist Karl Marx, nurse Florence Nightingale, Duleep Singh the last maharajah of the Sikh Empire, Sergeant Frederick Abberline of the Metropolitan Police Service known for his investigation of Jack the Ripper, and Queen Victoria.1718 Additionally, Jacobs granddaughter, Lydia Frye Lisa Norton, appears in a separate World War I segment, where she aids Winston Churchill in defending London against a new enemy espionage faction.

Story
In the present day, the Helix player, now an Assassin Initiate, is once again contacted by Bishop from the Assassin Brotherhood, and is tasked with reliving the memories of twin Assassins, Jacob and Evie Frye, to find a Piece of Eden hidden in London. Meanwhile, Rebecca Crane and Shaun Hastings have infiltrated an Abstergo facility and, against orders, decide to spy on a secret Templar meeting.

In 1868, Henry Greenborn Jayadeep Mir, the son of Indian Assassin, Arbaaz Mirwrites to the Assassin Brotherhood begging for aid. Green explains that the Brotherhood in London has fallen, leaving the city at the mercy of Templar Grand Master Crawford Starrick, who controls both Londons industry and criminal underworld. Starrick plans to use his wealth and influence to seize control of Britain and, through its holdings, the world. Outside of London, the Frye twins begin their work, with Jacob assassinating a corrupt factory boss, Rupert Ferris. Evie infiltrates a lab owned and run by David Brewster and Templar occultist Lucy Thorne. Inside, Evie finds Brewster experimenting on a Piece of Eden and assassinates him. Brewster tells Evie that Starrick knows of a second, more powerful Piece of Eden when the first Piece of Eden becomes unstable and explodes, forcing Evie to flee. With their missions successful, the Frye twins decide to disobey orders from the Brotherhood and head for London. In the present, Rebecca and Shaun spy on a meeting between senior Templar figure Isabelle Ardant and lvaro Gramtica. Rebecca and Shaun attempt to capture Isabelle but she had anticipated the ambush, revealing that Sigma Team leader Otso Berg and Violet da Costa were there to intercept the two assassins. Nevertheless, the two manage to flee when Bishop detonates a preplanted explosive.

In the past, the Frye twins arrive in London and meet with Henry Green, who reveals himself as an old acquaintance of their father. They have differing ideas on how to liberate London: Jacob advocates that they take the fight straight to the Templars, while Evie advises they find the Piece of Eden first. They agree to begin liberating the various boroughs of London by defeating Templarcontrolled gangs, sabotaging Templarcontrolled businesses, assassinating high ranking Templars, and building up their own criminal gang called the Rooks. Along the way, they enlist the help of various people including Charles Dickens, Frederick Abberline, Alexander Graham Bell, Florence Nightingale, Edward Hodson Bayley, and a young Arthur Conan Doyle.

Jacob decides to investigate the mysterious and addictive Soothing Syrup that Starrick has been distributing all across London and is slowly poisoning the populace. He meets Charles Darwin, who is also investigating the syrup. Together, they destroy the factory producing the syrup and interrogate Richard Owen. Owen informs them that John Elliotson has been manufacturing the syrup. Jacob and Darwin then head to Lambeth Asylum, where Jacob assassinates Elliotson. Next, Jacob decides to assist Pearl Attaway, one of Starricks competitors in the omnibus business. He sabotages Starricks omnibus company and assassinates its boss, Malcolm Milner. However, Milner warns Jacob that Starrick and Attaway are cousins and that Attaway is a Templar. In response, Jacob assassinates Attaway. Jacob then learns of Templar banker Philip Twopennys plot to rob the Bank of England and steal its gold reserve. With Abberlines assistance, Jacob breaks into the Bank and assassinates Twopenny. Jacob then heads to Parliament to prevent a Templar plot to assassinate British Prime Minister Benjamin Disraeli, who is pushing to pass the Corrupt Practices Act. Jacob assassinates the mastermind, the Earl of Cardigan.

Jacob is then contacted by Maxwell Roth, the leader of the Templarcontrolled gang, the Blighters. Roth offers to betray the Templars and form an alliance with the Rooks, which Jacob accepts. After assisting Roth in several missions against Starrick, Jacob breaks off the alliance when Roth tricks him into bombing a building full of child laborers. Jacob infiltrates Roths headquarters at the Alhambra Theatre and assassinates Roth.

Meanwhile, Evie looks for the Piece of Eden, managing to steal an Assassin journal from Thorne. Analyzing the journal, Evie discovers that it refers to the Shroud of Eden, a Piece of Eden that can heal any injury, including old age, and makes the wearer immortal. She follows the trail of clues underneath the mansion of Edward Kenway, where she finds a map detailing the locations of all of the Assassin vaults hidden in London. Her search leads her to famous landmarks such as the Monument to the Great Fire of London and St. Pauls Cathedral. She obtains the key needed to access the Shrouds vault, but it is stolen by Thorne. Evie then heads to the Tower of London, where the vault is located and assassinates Thorne. Thorne explains the Shroud is not in the Tower and claims that the Assassins have no idea of the true power of the Shroud before dying. Green believes the real vault is hidden in Buckingham Palace, and enlists the aid of the Maharajah Duleep Singh to find the schematics for the building. Unfortunately, the Templars manage to seize the schematics first. In addition to her hunt for the Shroud, Evie also helps correct the unintended consequences Jacobs assassinations have caused such as medicine shortages and currency inflation.

With all of his lieutenants dead, Starrick moves to retrieve the Shroud personally. Throughout the latter part of the game, the twins different views on approaching their time in London come to a boiling point when Jacob and Evie get into an argument over Jacobs recklessness and Evies apparent inaction. Henry warns the Frye twins that Starrick plans to break into Buckingham Palace, steal the Shroud, and kill all of Britains heads of church and state. The Frye twins agree to work together to stop Starrick before going their separate ways. The twins infiltrate a ball being held at the palace, where they meet Queen Victoria and Starrick himself. Starrick beats them to the vault and obtains the Shroud for himself, which grants him superhuman strength and regeneration from wounds. Working together, the Frye twins and Green manage to defeat and kill Starrick. After the battle, Jacob and Evie return the Shroud to the vault, reconcile their differences, and agree to continue working together. In recognition of their deeds, Queen Victoria knights the Frye twins and Green.

In the present, with the location of the Shroud confirmed, Shaun, Rebecca, and Russian Assassin Galina Voronina head to the vault. Unfortunately, Otso Berg, da Costa, and Ardant beat them there and a fight ensues in which Berg is knocked unconscious, Rebecca is shot and wounded and Ardant is killed by Shaun while da Costa escapes with the Shroud. Hacking Isabelles computer, the Assassins find out the Templars plan to use the Shroud to construct a living Precursor. The recording also shows that Juno is secretly manipulating certain employees within Abstergo from behind the scenes to sabotage the company, and has her own plans for the Shroud. Juno also contacts the Initiate through the simulation, leading them into a new memory segment of Lydia Frye, where she tracks down and kills a Sage in a wartorn London during World War I.

The Dreadful Crimes
The Frye twins are approached by Henry Raymond, a penny dreadful writer, as well as his follower, a young Arthur Conan Doyle. They team up to investigate a series of murders across London, visiting crime scenes, gathering evidence, interviewing witnesses and suspects, and ultimately solving the crimes by accusing the true perpetrators.

The twins are eventually summoned to Buckingham Palace by Queen Victoria, in order to solve the murder of one of her guards. It turns out that it is in fact Raymond who has posed as a guard and faked his own death, so he may steal the Queens Sceptre of the Dove by observing up close the combination to the safe that holds it. He has also left a series of false clues suggesting a bomb threat in the palace in order to cover his escape. However Doyle has already uncovered his plan and set out to stop him, but is held hostage on the palace roof in the process. One of the Fryes manages to distract Raymond while the other sneaks up and kills him, saving Doyle and recovering the Sceptre. In the aftermath, the Fryes encourage Doyle to try his own hand at writing detective fiction.

The Last Maharaja
After an unpleasant conversation with Duleep Singh regarding his lack of commitment to the people of India, Henry Green decides to enlist the help of the Frye twins so the Maharaja could be persuaded to reclaim his birthright. The twins manage to recover Singhs letters to his mother, which were previously intercepted by the British Indies Company B.I.C. in order to stop any correspondence. This finally convinces Singh that he should take action.

Singh orders the twins to locate and recover the stolen Punjabi gold, before arranging for transports to ship the gold back to India. He then proposes to recover the KohiNoor, a diamond in the possession of Queen Victoria, currently kept in the Tower of London. The twins accomplish the goal by infiltrating a gala held at that location; however Henry shows that the diamond they recover is a replica, and the true KohiNoor is in fact in the safe hands of the British Assassins, thanks to Jayadeeps father Arbaaz Mir handing over the diamond to Jacob and Evies father Ethan Frye.

The twins head to a B.I.C. factory and put an end to the companys production of biological weapons. In the process, they also discover that Brinley Ellsworth, a close friend of Singhs, is in fact behind the plots against the Maharaja. Singh arranges for a meeting where he confronts Ellsworth. With Evies help, Ellsworth is subdued. However, as Evie prepares to execute Ellsworth, she is stopped by Singh, who chooses to exercise mercy. Singh thanks the twins for their contribution before parting ways with them, continuing to fight for his heritage.

Jack the Ripper
In 1888, Jacob Frye meets Mr. Weaversbrook and warnes him not to publish Jacks letters as he wants to spread fear in London. He then receives word of another murder and goes to investigate. Jacob goes after the Ripper, who begins following him before eventually attacking. As the Ripper pursues Jacob, it is revealed that he knows Jacob personally, and possesses Assassin abilities. After escaping, Jacob reaches his lodgings, but the Ripper arrives and attacks again, with Jacob seemingly being killed.

Following the incident, Jacobs sister Evie arrives from India, having been summoned by Jacob some time before, where she is greeted by police inspector Frederick Abberline, who informs her that Jacob is missing and presumed dead. He also tells her that she may be the last Assassin remaining in London, and the only one capable of stopping the Ripper. After finding Jacobs lodgings, Evie takes some nonlethal fear tools used by the Indian Brotherhood. She also deduces that the Ripper is in fact one of Jacobs Assassin Initiates. Afterwards, she kills the Rippers lieutenants who have been aiding in his crimes and frees a number of prisoners he had been keeping hostage. All the while, the Ripper stalks Evie.

With more murders occurring, Evie is pressured to find the Ripper quickly; after the Rippers final murder, Abberline makes it plain unless she delivers the Ripper, he will not be able to stop her from being arrested for the crimes  Evie vows to stop the Ripper or die trying. She reexamines all of his old crime scenes and finds hidden clues that lead to him, as well as learning the fact that all of the women he murdered were Assassins. She later finds a message left by the Ripper, which reveals that he never forgave Jacob for failing to protect his mother from being killed by Starricks men. Evie deduces that the Ripper is waiting for her at Lambeth Asylum, where he was imprisoned before Jacob recruited him into the Brotherhood. Meanwhile, the Ripper returns to the Asylum and murders his former tormentors and destroys all records of his true identity. Evie arrives shortly after the Ripper and kills him in battle. Afterwards, she finds an imprisoned but still alive Jacob. With the Ripper dead, Abberline agrees to cover up the Rippers identity as an Assassin in order to protect the Brotherhood.

Time Anomaly
Following the games events, Jacob marries and has one son, who is also inducted into the Brotherhood. He also marries, and later has a child named Lydia Frye, born in 1893. She too was inducted into the Brotherhood and trained under her grandparents. She later marries an Assassin named Sam Crowder, but she keeps her maiden name.

At the outbreak of World War I, by 1914, Jacob and Evie were removed to the safety of the countryside, while Lydia remained in London to fight off German spies and Templar terrorists.

In 1916, at the behest of Winston Churchill, Lydia infiltrated and eliminated a German Templar spy facility in Tower Bridge. She later sought out, on his request, the rest of the group and their Sage leader that he deemed to be a pressing matter of national security which he was unable to broach with the government as he lacked strong enough evidence. In exchange for her services, Churchill promised Lydia that he would do what he could for the enfranchisement of women when he had returned to parliament after the War.

Lydia later conquers every single Templarinfested area, killing German spies and Templar captains, finally flushing the Sage out of his hiding place and killing him.

For every target and objective Lydia killed and completed, Juno appeared and told her past and rise. Juno ultimately learns of the mentioned Sages fate, and thanks the initiate for finding it out, before suggesting her hope that she and the Assassins can work together in the future.

Development
Assassins Creed Syndicate is the second major entry in the series not to be developed by Ubisoft Montreal, following 2014s Assassins Creed Rogue. Instead, on July 2, 2014, Ubisoft announced that Ubisoft Quebec would handle lead development as part of a major investment in the studio, who had assisted on the making of the six prior games as well as The Tyranny of King Washington and Freedom Cry, downloadable content for Assassins Creed III and Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag respectively.19 MarcAlexis Ct serves as the creative director for the game after working in various positions on Brotherhood, Revelations, Assassins Creed III, and Freedom Cry2021 while Franois Pelland returns as senior producer after Assassins Creed III, having also been an executive director on all three inbetween entries.822 Lydia Andrew is the games audio director, returning from Assassins Creed III, Black Flag, and Unity.823 Historian JeanVincent Roy served as a consultant on the game, having previously consulted on Assassins Creed III, and held various other positions at Ubisoft.24

Information on the game, then titled Assassins Creed Victory, first leaked on December 2, 2014 through the website Kotaku, which published details and screenshots from a sevenminute target gameplay footage video the site had acquired. Kotaku received a large amount of backlash for this article due to the article being placed up with very little information whilst proclaiming several facts which were proven false. Ubisoft confirmed the news later that same day in a statement where the company expressed disappointment that internal assets, not intended for public consumption had been leaked but said that they were excited to officially unveil what the studio has been working on at a later date.25 The game was officially revealed on May 12, 2015,2627 and was released worldwide on October 23, 2015 for PlayStation 4 and Xbox One, and on November 19, 2015 for Microsoft Windows.28

Lifesize toy replicas of weapons used by Evie and Jacob in the game, the Canesword and the Gauntlet with Hidden blade, were available for purchase at launch.2930 On May 13, 2015, five different editions of the game were announced for Europe.31

The game was supported with multiple downloadable content, as well as a Season Pass. The Darwin and Dickens Conspiracy downloadable content was available for players who preordered the game, and was also later bundled into the Streets of London DLC on January 19, 2016. It adds three missions involving Charles Darwin and Charles Dickens into the game. A DLC called The Dreadful Crimes, which was exclusive for the PlayStation 4 until March 2016, is also available for players to purchase but was NOT included in the Season Pass for the PC. The DLC expands upon Unitys murder investigation system and tasks players to solve multiple murder cases.32 A DLC entitled Jack the Ripper, loosely based on the notorious crimes committed by the serial killer in the Whitechapel area of London in 1888, was released on December 15, 2015 for consoles and December 22, 2015 for Microsoft Windows.33 The Last Maharaja, the final DLC following Duleep Singhs quest to reclaim his heritage, was released on March 1, 2016 for all platforms.34

FeaturesStandard Edition
consoles and PCThe Rooks Edition
consoles and PCGold Edition
consoles and PCCharing Cross Edition
consoles and PCBig Ben Edition Uplay exclusive
consoles and PC
Game discYesYesYesYesYes
Exclusive packagingYesYes Black, foldout cardboard boxYesYes Charing Cross boxYes Big Ben box and Futurepak disc case
Ingame content
Darwin and Dickens Conspiracy missionYes preorder onlyYesYesYesYes
Runaway Train missionNoYesYesYesYes
Baker Street outfitNoNoYesNoNo
Season PassNo can be purchased separatelyNo can be purchased separatelyYesNo can be purchased separatelyYes
Physical content
Official soundtrack CDNoYesNoYesYes
Doublesided London mapNoYesNoYesYes
ArtbookNoYesNoYesYes
Jacob Frye statuetteNoNoNoYes 26 cm figurine on Charing Cross railsYes 30 cm figurine in Big Ben clockwork
Hip flaskNoNoNoNoYes
Numbered lithographyNoNoNoNoYes
Music
The score to Assassins Creed Syndicate was composed by American composer Austin Wintory.35 The lyrical songs in the game, murder ballads, were composed by Wintory and Australian musical comedy band, Tripod.36 The soundtrack was released on Amazon MP3 and iTunes on October 23, 2015.

Reception
Reception
Aggregate score
AggregatorScore
MetacriticXONE 7810037
PS4 7610038
PC 7410039
Review scores
PublicationScore
Destructoid7.51040
EGM8.51041
Game Informer91042
Game Revolution45 stars43
GameSpot91044
GamesRadar45 stars45
Giant Bomb45 stars46
IGN8.21047
OXM UK3.55 stars48
PC Gamer US6610049
Polygon8.51050
VideoGamer.com51051
Assassins Creed Syndicate received generally favorable reviews for the PlayStation 4 and Xbox One versions, while the PC version of the game received mixed or average reviews from critics, according to review aggregator Metacritic.383739

Alexa Corriea from GameSpot praised the fluidity of Syndicates new combat system, as well as the beauty of the map and the addition of the rope launcher. She hailed the game as a triumphant return to form for the franchise.44 Daniel Krupa from IGN gave the game an 8.210, citing the design of the city and the lighthearted plot as high points, while criticizing the repetitive combat, yet saying it was better than Unitys combat.47 Brett Makedonski from Destructoid gave the game 7.510, praising its cast of memorable characters and the uniqueness of its assassination missions. However, he also stated almost all of its missteps are in the gameplay, criticizing its combat and carriagedriving mechanics. In addition, while acknowledging that the grappling hook has indeed made traversing London easier, he believed it feels like cheating and takes the pleasure of climbing out of the series.40 Christopher Livingston from PC Gamer gave the game 66100. He praised the characters and the main missions, though noting that the side missions are repetitive and not as enjoyable, and the novelty ends hours before the game does.49

In December 2015, Game Informer ranked the game as the fourth best game in the Assassins Creed series to date.52

Sales
Assassins Creed Syndicate debuted at number one in the UK according to ChartTrack. However, in its first week it was the second worst selling game of the franchise in the UK, only outselling Assassins Creed Rogue. According to reports from Ubisoft these lower sales in the first week were due to the release of Assassins Creed Unity 2014 having a negative impact on the sales due to its notorious number of bugs and glitches at launch. Syndicates second week sales beat those of Unitys.53 The game was the ninth bestselling retail game in the UK.54

Accolades
List of awards and nominations for Assassins Creed Syndicate
Notes
 Additional work by Ubisoft Montreal, Ubisoft Singapore, Ubisoft Annecy, Ubisoft Montpellier, Ubisoft Reflections, Ubisoft Chengdu, Ubisoft Shanghai, Ubisoft Sofia and Ubisoft Kiev.
 The seven boroughs of London are Westminster, the Strand, the City of London, Whitechapel, the Thames, Southwark and Lambeth.4
 The development team stated that the map is approximately 30 larger than Paris in Assassins Creed Unity 2014.5
 Assassins Creed III: Liberation featured a female protagonist, but Liberation is not considered a part of the main series.
References
 Assassins Creed Syndicate review roundup. GameAsylum.com.
 Assassins Creed Syndicate a historical failure. theguardian.com.
 Assassins Creed Syndicate is everything thats great and terrible about the series. theverge.com.
 Dunsmore, Kevin May 12, 2015. Assassins Creed: Syndicate Officially Announced. Hardcore Gamer. Retrieved May 13, 2015.
 Krupa, Daniel May 12, 2015. Assassins Creed Syndicate Officially Announced. IGN. Ziff Davis. Archived from the original on November 28, 2015. Retrieved November 28, 2015.
 Assassins Creed Syndicate wont have totally random side quests this time. GamesRadar. June 7, 2015. Retrieved June 9, 2015.
 Griffin, Andrew May 13, 2015. Assassins Creed Syndicate: trailer drops and preorders announced as more details emerge on game set in Victorian London. The Independent. Retrieved May 14, 2015.
 Orry, James May 12, 2015. 7 things Ubisoft wants you to know about Assassins Creed: Syndicate. VideoGamer.com. Retrieved May 12, 2015.
 Blain, Louise May 12, 2015. Who is Evie Frye? Meet Assassins Creed Syndicates female hero. GamesRadar. Retrieved May 12, 2015.
 Webster, Andrew May 12, 2015. Assassins Creed Syndicate brings the series to London. The Verge. Retrieved May 12, 2015.
 Ray Corriea, Alexa May 12, 2015. Assassins Creed Syndicates New Rope Launcher Adds a Batman Twist to Your Arsenal. GameSpot. Retrieved May 13, 2015.
 Martin, Liam May 12, 2015. Assassins Creed Syndicate revealed: Male and female siblings take back Victorian London. Digital Spy. Retrieved May 13, 2015.
 Ray Corriea, Alexa May 12, 2015. Assassins Creed Syndicate Adds GTAStyle Vehicles. GameSpot. Retrieved May 13, 2015.
 Sarker, Samit May 12, 2015. Assassins Creed Syndicate has no multiplayer. Polygon. Retrieved May 12, 2015.
 Karmali, Luke May 28, 2015. Assassins Creed Syndicate Will Not Have A Companion App. IGN. Retrieved May 28, 2015.
 Lewis, Anne May 12, 2015. Assassins Creed Syndicate Announced. UbiBlog.
 Krupa, Daniel May 12, 2015. Assassins Creed Syndicate Officially Announced. IGN. Retrieved May 12, 2015.
 Juba, Joe May 12, 2015. Interview: The Finer Points Of Assassins Creed Syndicate. Game Informer. Retrieved May 13, 2015.
 Matulef, Jeffery July 3, 2014. Upcoming Assassins Creed game will be the first not headed by Ubisoft Montreal. Eurogamer. Retrieved May 13, 2015.
 Grubb, Jeff July 2, 2014. Ubisoft expands its Quebec City studio to lead the future of Assassins Creed. VentureBeat. Retrieved May 13, 2015.
 Ray Corriea, Alexa May 12, 2015. How Assassins Creed Syndicate Reinvents Stealth and Combat in the Series. GameSpot. Retrieved May 12, 2015.
 Kamen, Matt May 12, 2015. Assassins Creed: Syndicate industrialises steampunk slayings. Wired.co.uk. Retrieved May 12, 2015.
 Ray Corriea, Alexa May 12, 2015. Assassins Creed Syndicate Story, Characters, and Setting Breakdown. GameSpot. Retrieved May 12, 2015.
 Williams, Mike May 13, 2015. Assassins Creed Syndicate: Female Assassins and Gang Members, A Step for Equality. USgamer. Retrieved May 13, 2015.
 Schreier, Jason December 2, 2014. Next Years Big Assassins Creed Is Set in Victorian London UPDATE. Kotaku. Retrieved May 12, 2015.
 Schreier, Jason May 7, 2015. Next Assassins Creed to Be Announced Next Week; Now Called Syndicate. Kotaku. Retrieved May 12, 2015.
 Schreier, Jason May 11, 2015. Sources: You Can Play As A Woman In Assassins Creed: Syndicate. Kotaku. Retrieved May 11, 2015.
 Juba, Joe May 12, 2015. Assassins Creed Syndicate: Ubisofts Latest Installment Officially Unveiled. Game Informer. Retrieved May 13, 2015.
 Saed, Sherif May 13, 2015. Assassins Creed: Syndicate has four special editions, a season pass  two replicas. VG247. Retrieved May 13, 2015.
 Blain, Louise May 13, 2015. Jacobs cane in Assassins Creed Syndicate is a knife and a scythe blade. GamesRadar. Retrieved May 13, 2015.
 Phillips, Tom May 13, 2015. Assassins Creed Syndicates four special editions detailed. Eurogamer. Retrieved May 13, 2015.
 Totilo, Stephen October 29, 2015. Assassins Creed Syndicates DLC Missions Range From Terrible To Great. Kotaku. Retrieved December 19, 2015.
 Hussain, Tamoor December 15, 2015. Go FacetoFace With Jack The Ripper in This Interactive 3D Assassins Creed Trailer. GameSpot. Retrieved December 19, 2015.
 Phillips, Tom March 1, 2016. Assassins Creed Syndicate bows out today with The Last Maharaja DLC. Eurogamer. Retrieved March 3, 2016.
 Blake, Vikki September 11, 2015. Journey Composer Will Write Assassins Creed Syndicate Score. IGN. Retrieved December 6, 2015.
 http:www.nova969.com.aunovagamingwhatnewgamedidaussiemusicaltriotripodwork
 Assassins Creed Syndicate for Xbox One Reviews. Metacritic. Retrieved December 4, 2015.
 Assassins Creed Syndicate for PlayStation 4 Reviews. Metacritic. Retrieved October 22, 2015.
 Assassins Creed Syndicate for PC Reviews. Metacritic. Retrieved December 4, 2015.
 Makedonski, Brett October 28, 2015. Review: Assassins Creed Syndicate. Destructoid. Retrieved October 28, 2015.
 Carsillo, Ray October 28, 2015. Assassins Creed Syndicate review. Electronic Gaming Monthly. Retrieved October 28, 2015.
 Juba, Joe October 22, 2015. Rebuilding The Brotherhood  Assassins Creed Syndicate  PlayStation 4. Game Informer. Retrieved October 22, 2015.
 Haught, Jeb October 23, 2015. Assassins Creed: Syndicate Review. Game Revolution. Retrieved October 23, 2015.
 Ray Correia, Alexa October 22, 2015. Assassins Creed Syndicate Review. GameSpot. Retrieved October 22, 2015.
 Blain, Lousie October 22, 2015. Assassins Creed: Syndicate review. GamesRadar. Retrieved October 22, 2015.
 Navarro, Alex November 6, 2015. Assassins Creed Syndicate Review. Giant Bomb. Retrieved November 6, 2015.
 Krupa, Daniel October 22, 2015. Assassins Creed Syndicate Review. IGN. Retrieved October 22, 2015.
 Schilling, Chris October 22, 2015. Assassins Creed: Syndicate review OXM. Official Xbox Magazine UK. GamesRadar. Retrieved October 22, 2015.
 Livingston, Christopher November 25, 2015. Assassins Creed: Syndicate review. PC Gamer. Retrieved November 25, 2015.
 Kollar, Philip October 22, 2015. Assassins Creed Syndicate review. Polygon. Retrieved October 22, 2015.
 Burns, Steven October 22, 2015. Assassins Creed: Syndicate Review. VideoGamer.com. Retrieved October 22, 2015.
 Juba, Joe December 4, 2015. Ranking The Entire Assassins Creed Series. Game Informer. GameStop. Retrieved December 5, 2015.
 Assassins Creed Syndicate sales clearly impacted by Unity. eurogamer.net.
 Nunneley, Stephany January 16, 2016. UKs bestselling games of 2015: FIFA 16 wins, PS4 tops in console and software sales. VG247. Retrieved March 23, 2016.
 Nominees  The Game Awards 2015. The Game Awards. Ola Balola. 12 November 2015. Archived from the original on 14 November 2015. Retrieved 13 November 2015.
 The Best Games of 2015  Game of the Year 2015. GameSpot. Retrieved 4 February 2016.
 Best of 2015 Awards. Game Revolution. Net Revolution. 1 January 2016. Retrieved 4 March 2016.
 IGNs Best of 2015. IGN. Retrieved 4 February 2016.
 Sinclair, Brendan 11 January 2016. Writers Guild of America doles out game nominations. Games Industry. Eurogamer. Retrieved 14 January 2016.
 Rise of the Tomb Raider Leads D.I.C.E. Awards With 9 Nominations. GameSpot. 13 January 2016. Retrieved 14 January 2016.
 SXSW Gaming Awards Info. South by Southwest. Retrieved 22 March 2016.
 Winners  National Academy of Video Game Trade Reviewers Corporation. National Academy of Video Game Trade Reviewers. 21 March 2016. Retrieved 22 March 2016.
 BAFTA Games Awards 2016 Nominees Revealed. IGN. 10 March 2016. Retrieved 10 March 2016.
External links
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Assassins Creed Syndicate.
Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Assassins Creed Syndicate.
Official website
WPVG icon 2016.svgVideo games portalSamsung Galaxy S5 Vector.svg2010s portal
vte
Assassins Creed
Categories: 2015 video gamesActionadventure gamesAssassins CreedLGBTrelated video gamesOpen world video gamesOrganized crime video gamesPlayStation 4 gamesPlayStation 4 Pro enhanced gamesStealth video gamesSteampunk video gamesSingleplayer video gamesUbisoft gamesVideo games developed in CanadaVideo games featuring female protagonistsVideo games set in the 19th centuryVideo games set in EnglandVideo games set in LondonWindows gamesXbox One games

Assassins Creed Origins
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
Assassins Creed Origins
Assassins Creed Origins Cover Art.png
DevelopersUbisoft Montreala
PublishersUbisoft
Directors
Jean Guesdon
Ashraf Ismail
ProducersMartin Schelling
DesignersEric Baptizat
ProgrammersFrdrick Champoux
ArtistsRaphael Lacoste
WritersAlain Mercieca
ComposersSarah Schachner
SeriesAssassins Creed
EngineAnvilNext 2.0
Platforms
Microsoft Windows
PlayStation 4
Xbox One
ReleaseOctober 27, 2017
GenresActionadventure, stealth
ModesSingleplayer
Assassins Creed Origins is an actionadventure video game developed by Ubisoft Montreal and published by Ubisoft. It is the tenth major installment in the Assassins Creed series and the successor to 2015s Assassins Creed Syndicate. It was released worldwide for Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 4, and Xbox One on October 27, 2017. The game is set in Egypt near the end of the Ptolemaic period 4947 BCE and recounts the secret fictional history of realworld events. The story follows a Medjay named Bayek, and explores the origins of the centurieslong conflict between the Brotherhood of Assassins, who fight for peace by promoting liberty, and The Order of the Ancientsforerunners to the Templar Orderwho desire peace through the forced imposition of order.

Origins received positive reviews from critics, who praised the story, characters, voice acting, reworked gameplaysystems, immersive world of Egypt, historical accuracy and the visuals, while criticizing some of the pacing and technical issues. The game was followed by Assassins Creed Odyssey, which takes place in Classical Greece and was released on October 5, 2018.


Contents
1Gameplay
2Synopsis
2.1Setting
2.2Plot
3Downloadable content
3.1The Hidden Ones
3.2Discovery Tour
3.3The Curse of the Pharaohs
4Development
4.1Marketing
5Editions
6Reception
6.1Sales
6.2Accolades
7Notes
8References
9External links
Gameplay
The player character riding a horse in a village, with NPCs around.
Players may travel around the games open world of Egypt on horseback.
Assassins Creed Origins is an actionadventure stealth game played from a thirdperson perspective. Players complete questslinear scenarios with set objectivesto progress through the story, earn experience points, and acquire new skills. Outside of quests, the player can freely roam the open world environment on foot, horseback, camelback, horsedrawn vehicles or boat to explore locations, complete optional sidequests and unlock weapons and equipment.

The eagle vision mode, which was used by the franchise to give the player the ability to scout an area by highlighting enemies and objects, has been replaced by a Bonellis eagle named Senu as a companion.1 The player is able to take control of Senu and scout an area in advance, highlighting enemies which will then be visible when they return to controlling Bayek, the games main character. The player can also tame various predators which will serve as a companion for the player and assist them against enemies.2 Naval combat, underwater exploration and tomb raiding return to the series.23456

The game also features revised combat mechanics.7 Previous titles in the Assassins Creed series used a paired animation system whereby the player character would engage with an enemy and combat would be dictated by a series of predetermined animations based on player inputs and scripted AI movements. Origins moves to a hitbox system. When the player wields a weapon, they will strike at whatever is in range, allowing them to hit enemies directly, injure individual body parts, and creating the possibility of missing an enemy entirely. Complementing this is the way weapons fall into different categories and are rated on their damage dealt, speed and range.8 Enemies will be drawn from several basic archetypes that use a variety of tactics in combat which, combined with the hitbox system, will require the player to learn the attributes of individual weapons and tailor their playing style to succeed in combat. As enemy combat is also dictated by the hitbox system, the player has been equipped with a shield and needs to balance their offensive and defensive capabilities.7 Locations within the game world are designed to enable the player to choose their playing style by offering stealth and open combat as equallyviable choices for completing objectives.

Origins introduces an arenabased combat system where the player fights waves of increasingly difficult combinations of enemies culminating in a boss fight.9 While the introduction to the arena is incorporated into the main story, the arena mode stands alone from the wider narrative. The game world features several arenas, with a variety of enemy combinations and unique bosses not found in the game world. The player is able to unlock additional weapons and equipment by completing arena fights.

Synopsis
Setting
The player takes on the role of a Medjay named Bayek and his wife Aya, as they work to protect the people of the Ptolemaic Kingdom during a time of widespread upheaval: the Pharaoh, Ptolemy XIII, struggles to maintain his rule while harbouring ambitions of expanding his kingdom; his sister, the recently deposed Cleopatra, begins marshalling loyalist forces to launch a countercoup against Ptolemy; and frequent incursions into the Kingdom by the Roman Republic under the command of Julius Caesar lead to fears of an imminent invasion. Bayeks role as a Medjay brings him and Aya into contact with the secretive forces manipulating these events and into becoming the first Assassins.

Plot

This articles plot summary may be too long or excessively detailed. Please help improve it by removing unnecessary details and making it more concise. November 2017 Learn how and when to remove this template message
In the present day, Layla Hassan, a researcher at Abstergos Historical Research Division, is tasked along with her friend and coworker Deanna Geary with finding and retrieving an artifact in Egypt. However, she instead finds a tomb containing the mummies of ancient Assassins Bayek and Aya. Hoping to find any relevant information that would secure her a position in the companys Animus Project, Layla decides to relive both Bayek and Ayas memories using her modified Animus without telling her superiors, despite Deannas protest.

In 49 BCE, Bayek, a respected Medjay in charge of protecting the Siwa Oasis, is abducted along with his son Khemu by a group of five masked men to an underground vault in the Temple of Amun. The masked men give Bayek a golden orb and demand that he use it to open a secret Vault. Khemu helps Bayek escape, but during the struggle to kill one of the masked men, Bayek inadvertently stabs Khemu in the chest, killing him.

One year later in 48 BCE, Bayek has exiled himself from Siwa in order to track down the five masked men to take his revenge. He finds the first one, Rudjek The Heron, and kills him. Bayek then returns to Siwa to kill the local priest Medunamun, The Ibis, who has been torturing Siwans for information to open the same vault. After killing Medunamun, Bayek then heads for Alexandria, where Aya has been tracking another of the masked men. Upon meeting Aya, she reveals that she has already killed Actaeon The Vulture and Ktesos The Ram, leaving only one target left, The Snake. Aya also reveals that she has been working with Apollodorus the Sicilian and Cleopatra to uncover The Snakes identity. She gives Bayek the first Hidden Blade, which he uses to track down and kill Eudoros, whom he believes to be the Snake in a bathhouse. Killing Eudoros costs Bayek his left ring finger, cut off from the same hidden blade to kill his target.

Bayek remembers Eudoros words and begins to have doubts. He decides to meet with Apollodorus and Cleopatra for answers. Cleopatra tells Bayek that she was ousted from the throne by the masked men, who call themselves the Order of Ancients and seek to control all of Egypt by using Ptolemy as their puppet. In addition, there are more members of Order than the five Bayek and Aya had already killed: The Scarab, The Hyena, The Lizard and The Crocodile. In fact, Eudoros was actually The Hippo, and the name of the Snake is used to refer to the Order as a whole. Confronted with this new information, Bayek agrees to become Cleopatras Medjay and assassinate the remaining members of the Order. Bayek tracks down and kills all of them while Aya convinces Pompey the Great to ally with Cleopatra.

In the present, Layla and Deanna are attacked by Abstergo soldiers for failing to check in with the company. Layla kills her attackers, but Deanna is captured and executed. Swearing revenge, Layla returns to the Animus, determined to complete her mission.

Bayek receives a letter from Aya explaining that there are two more members of the Order, The Scorpion and The Jackal, who are members of Ptolemys royal guard and the likely culprits responsible for Khemus death. He finds out that Lucius Septimius is the Jackal and tracks him, but is too late to stop him from assassinating Pompey. With no other options, Cleopatra has Bayek and Aya help sneak her into the palace to meet Julius Caesar. Cleopatra impresses Caesar and secures his support. Bayek kills Pothinus, The Scorpion, but is stopped from killing Septimius by Caesar. Aya watches Ptolemy get eaten by crocodiles when he tries to flee across the Nile.

After the end of the civil war, Cleopatra takes the throne as Pharaoh. Septimius becomes an advisor for Caesar and Cleopatra cuts ties with Bayek and Aya. This causes Bayek and his supporters to realize that Cleopatra and Caesar have now allied themselves with the Order. Realizing his mistake in supporting Cleopatra, Bayek gathers his allies to form a brotherhood to counter the Order and defend the free will of the common people. Bayek and Aya realize the Order showed a strong interest in the tomb of Alexander the Great, which they investigate. There, they find a mortally wounded Apollodorus who warns them that Caesars lieutenant, Flavius, is The Lion and the true leader of the Order. He and Septimius had taken the Orb and a Staff from the tomb and are heading back to Siwa for the Vault.

Upon returning to Siwa, they find the Vault already opened. Bayek tracks down and confronts Flavius, who bears the activated Apple of Eden, but kills him, avenging Khemus death. Bayek returns to Aya, who has recruited Marcus Junius Brutus the Younger and Gaius Cassius Longinus to their cause. She plans to head to Rome with Brutus and Cassius to assassinate Caesar and Septimius. Bayek and Aya part ways but form the foundation of the Assassin Brotherhood when they both swear to protect the world from the shadows. Upon their separation, Bayek drops his eagles skull charm, a necklace of Khemus, into the sand which leaves an impression, becoming the icon of their new Brotherhood.

After this, Layla wakes up from the Animus to find William Miles, present day Mentor of the Assassin Brotherhood watching over her. She accepts Williams offer to work with the Assassins, but stops short of actually joining them. The two depart for modernday Alexandria.

In Rome, Aya confronts Septimius, who wields the Staff of Eden and she kills him. She then fails to correctly infiltrate the Roman Senate and assassinates Caesar. Later, she meets with Cleopatra and warns her to be a fair ruler or she will return to assassinate her. Afterward, Bayek and Aya now calling herself Amunetb begin recruiting and training other Assassins as they build the Assassin Brotherhood in Egypt and Rome respectively.

Downloadable content
The Hidden Ones
The Hidden Ones is a storydriven expansion that sheds more light on the rise of the Assassin Brotherhood. It is set four years after the events of the main game and takes the player to the Sinai Peninsula region, where they will have to investigate a clash between a rebel faction and occupying Roman forces. In addition to the new story chapter, The Hidden Ones introduces a variety of new items for the player to acquire, including an outfit, two Legendary weapon sets, a pair of mounts, and other weapons. The expansion raises the games level cap to 45.11

Discovery Tour
The new educational mode lets the player choose between free roaming the world of Ancient Egypt to learn more about its history and daily life, or embarking on guided tours curated by historians and Egyptologists. This disables the storyline, sidequests, conflicts with enemies, time limits, and gameplay constraints. Discovery Tour was released on February 20, 2018.121314 A standalone expansion with only the Discovery Tour included was also released for Windows specifically for the educational market.15

Discovery Tour is based on reliable research results from universities and institutions like the British Museum.16

The Curse of the Pharaohs
The second expansion is a new quest, set in Thebes, about an ancient curse that is plaguing the land due to grave robbers angering the gods. The Curse of the Pharaohs focuses on Egyptian mythology, pitting players against famous pharaohs and Egyptian beasts, as they uncover the cause of the curse that has brought certain dead rulers back to life. The Hidden Ones raises the level cap to 45 while The Curse of the Pharaohs increases it to 55. Like The Hidden Ones, the expansion adds new outfits, gear and weapons, these themed around ancient Egyptian mythology. The Curse of the Pharaohs was released on March 13, 2018.1114

Development
Development of Assassins Creed Origins started in early 2014, after the completion of Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag.17 The series had been following a yearly release cycle, but after the launch of Assassins Creed Syndicate in 2015, Ubisoft chose to delay the release of Origins until 2017.18 Ubisoft CEO Yves Guillemot cited a desire to focus on the quality of the individual titles, the opportunity to develop future games with new engines, and the disappointing sales of Syndicate as the reasons behind the decision.19 The team enlisted Ubisoft Kiev to develop the PC version in parallel with the console versions.20

Information on Origins, then titled Assassins Creed Empire, first leaked in January 2017, showing several screenshots of a character on a boat and in front of a cave. The game was officially revealed on June 11, 2017.6 It was developed using the latest iteration of the AnvilNext engine.citation needed During production of Assassins Creed III in November 2011 Ubisoft conducted a fan survey exploring potential settings for future titles. Ancient Egypt was one of the most popular choices,21 but Alex Hutchinson, the creative director of Assassins Creed III, dismissed the results as he considered Ancient Egyptas with the other two chosen settings, feudal Japan and World War IIas being the worst choices for a setting.22 The development team hired Egyptologists to assist in making the open world more accurate to the time period.23

The original score for the game was composed by Sarah Schachner, who previously worked on the series with Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag and Assassins Creed Unity.24

Marketing
In August 2017, Square Enix announced a promotional crossover between the Assassins Creed franchise and Final Fantasy XV.25 Taking the form of an ingame event, it introduced Assassins Creedthemed content to the game.26 Assassins Creedthemed content was also made available in other Ubisoft games such as Tom Clancys Ghost Recon Wildlands and South Park: The Fractured but Whole.

Editions
At launch, the following editions were available:27

FeaturesStandard Edition
consoles and PCDeluxe Edition
consoles and PCGold Edition
consoles and PCGods Edition
consoles and PCDawn of the Creed Edition
Uplay exclusive
consoles and PCDawn of the Creed  Legendary Edition
Uplay exclusive
consoles and PC
Game discYesYesYesYesYesYes
Ingame content
Secrets of the Pyramid Mission missionYes preorder onlyYesYesYesYesYes
Ambush at Sea missionNoYesYesYesYesYes
Bonus Ability Points missionNoYesYesYesYesYes
Desert Cobra PackNoYesYesYesYesYes
Season PassNo can be purchased separatelyNo can be purchased separatelyYesNo can be purchased separatelyYesYes
Physical content
SteelbookNoNoNoNoYesYes
Map of EgyptNoNoNoYesYesYes
Official soundtrack CDNoNoNoYesYesYes
ArtbookNoNoNoYesYesYes
Exclusive packagingNoNoNoYesYesYes
Art CardsNoNoNoYesYesYes
FigurineNoNoNoYes Bayek on the Skhmet statue 10.2 27 cmYes Bayek and Senu 14.5 37 cmYes Numbered Bayek and Senu 28.7 73
Bayeks Eagle Skull AmuletNoNoNoNoYesYes, Premium
4 large lithographsNoNoNoNoNoYes
Certificate of authenticityNoNoNoNoNoYes
Reception
Reception
Aggregate score
AggregatorScore
MetacriticPC 8410028
PS4 8110029
XONE 8510030
Review scores
PublicationScore
Destructoid81031
Edge61032
EGM91033
Game Informer8.51034
Game Revolution4.55 stars35
GameSpot71036
GamesRadar55 stars37
IGN91038
PC Gamer US8410039
Polygon8.51040
VideoGamer.com8.01041
Assassins Creed Origins received generally favorable reviews from critics, according to review aggregator Metacritic.282930

Louise Blain from GamesRadar gave the game a score of 5 out of 5 stars and called it the best of the franchise, saying that As beautiful as it is deadly, Origins Egyptian playground is finally everything you wanted the Creed to be.37 Ray Carsillos score of 910 on EGMNow said that Assassins Creed Origins delivers a robust experience that mixes up the traditional Assassins Creed formula in a way thats fresh and fun to playbut which also harkens back to the series roots in some welcome ways, too. It marks an evolution fans might not have even known they were waiting for, delivering one of the best overall experiences weve seen yet from the series.33

Alanah Pearces 910 review on IGN stated that Assassins Creed Origins is a deepdive into a truly stunning realization of ancient Egypt, with a rich series of cultures, genuine characters, and more mission variety than any other game in the series. The combat is challenging and thoughtful, and while the loot system doesnt match up to games like Destiny 2, there are enough different weapon types and enough enemy variety to keep you swapping between weapons, catered to the situation. The RPG elements encourage challenges of their own, and even despite a handful of bugs, I desperately wanted to keep playing.38

Colin Campbell of Polygon gave the game a score of 8.510, writing, In essence, Assassins Creed Origins is much the same game as the original Assassins Creed, which came out a decade ago. Its a formula that people like to play, and its certainly been honed and improved over the years. Origins is, then, undoubtedly the best iteration of this formula yet. But I yearn for a fresh approach and new ideas, something that astounds the senses as much as the wondrous world this game inhabits.40

The games historical accuracy and use of historians and Egyptologists was praised by Windows Central42 and Forbes, which referred to it as perhaps the most realistic recreation of classical Egypt ever made.43 Vice spoke about this to Harvard Egyptologist Peter Der Manuelian, who highlighted many of the games efforts.44

GameSpot gave the game a 710, saying: While Assassins Creed Origins reaches great heights in this new setting, it routinely runs into issues that bog down the overall experience. Technical issues make for an inconsistent experience and its new gameplay pillars wobble under the weight of its systems. But despite this, the world of Origins remains fresh and exciting to explore, which is a testament to the remarkable setting and compelling story.36

Eurogamer ranked the game 23rd on their list of the Top 50 Games of 2017,45 GamesRadar ranked it third on their list of the 25 Best Games of 2017,46 and EGMNow ranked it sixth on their list of the 25 Best Games of 2017,47 while Polygon ranked it 15th on their list of the 50 best games of 2017.48 The game won the award for Best Open World Game in PC Gamers 2017 Game of the Year Awards,49 whereas its other nominations were for Best Setting and Game of the Year.50 It was also nominated for Best Xbox One Game in both Destructoids Game of the Year Awards 2017 and IGNs Best of 2017 Awards,5152 the latter of which also nominated it for Best ActionAdventure Game and Best Graphics.5354 In Giant Bombs 2017 Game of the Year Awards, the game won the award for Best New Character Bayek, and was a runnerup for Best World.5556 It also won the award for Best Setting in Game Informers 2017 Action Game of the Year Awards.57

Kotakus Jason Schreier discovered that many of the games user reviews on review aggregator Metacritic were artificially improved through the use of an online bot.58

In an article on historythemed video games, the Damals magazine wrote that the Discovery Tour mode presented a transformation from an entertainment product to an interactive learning aid. In its 2018 exhibition on the Queens of Egypt, the PointeCallire Museum of Montreal, Canada, incorporated images and video sequences from Discovery Tour.16

Sales
In November 2017, Ubisoft announced sales of Assassins Creed Origins during its first 10 days were double that of Assassins Creed Syndicate, while player engagement also saw an increase. 35 of the sales were digital download, compared to just 12 for Syndicate.59

Accolades
YearAwardCategoryResultRef.
2017E3 2017 Game Critics AwardsBest of ShowNominated60
Best Console GameNominated
Best ActionAdventure GameNominated
Gamescom 2017Best Console Game PlayStation 4Won6162
Best Console Game Xbox OneNominated
Best PC GameNominated
Best RPGNominated
35th Annual Golden Joystick AwardsUltimate Game of the YearNominated63
The Game Awards 2017Best ActionAdventure GameNominated64
Steam AwardsThe Even Better Than I Expected AwardNominated65
2018New York Game Awards 2018Statue of Liberty Award for Best WorldNominated66
16th Visual Effects Society AwardsOutstanding Visual Effects in a RealTime ProjectWon6768
Outstanding Created Environment in an Episode, Commercial, or RealTime ProjectNominated
21st Annual D.I.C.E. AwardsOutstanding Achievement in Character BayekNominated6970
Outstanding Technical AchievementNominated
Adventure Game of the YearNominated
National Academy of Video Game Trade Reviewers AwardsArt Direction, Period InfluenceNominated7172
Control Design, 3DNominated
Costume DesignNominated
Game, Franchise AdventureNominated
Graphics, TechnicalNominated
LightingTexturingNominated
Original Dramatic Score, FranchiseNominated
Use of Sound, FranchiseNominated
SXSW Gaming AwardsExcellence in Visual AchievementNominated7374
Excellence in AnimationNominated
Game Developers Choice AwardsBest TechnologyNominated7576
14th British Academy Games AwardsBest GameNominated7778
Game DesignNominated
Performer Abubakar SalimNominated
ASCAP Composers Choice Awards2017 ASCAP Video Game Score of the YearNominated7980
Notes
 Additional work by Ubisoft Singapore, Ubisoft Sofia, Ubisoft Bucharest, Ubisoft Chengdu, Ubisoft Kiev, Ubisoft Montpellier, Ubisoft Quebec, Ubisoft Philippines and Ubisoft Shanghai.
 In Assassins Creed II, Amunet is described as having assassinated Cleopatra in 30 BC.10
References
 Cork, Jeff June 11, 2017. Meet Assassins Creed Origins new hero  and his eagle. Game Informer. Retrieved September 1, 2017.
 Blain, Louise; Roberts, David June 12, 2017. Assassins Creed Origins to get tons of challenging boss fights. GamesRadar. Future plc.
 Plagge, Kallie June 11, 2017. E3 2017: Assassins Creed Origins Is A True OpenWorld RPG. GameSpot. CBS Interactive.
 Wallace, Kimberley June 11, 2017. Five Things You Need To Know About Assassins Creed Origins. Game Informer. GameStop.
 Minotti, Mike June 11, 2017. Why Assassins Creed: Origins is going to Egypt and revamping the series. GamesBeat.
 Gurwin, Gabe June 11, 2017. Everything we know about Assassins Creed Origins. Digital Trends.
 Blain, Louise June 11, 2017. Ive played Assassins Creed Origins and OMG EVERYTHING has changed. Here are 8 reasons youll be going to Ancient Egypt. GamesRadar. Future plc. Retrieved September 1, 2017.
 Morris, Tatiana August 18, 2017. Watch Assassins Creed Origins dev details weapon types, combat changes, and more. GameZone. Retrieved September 1, 2017.
 Martin, Matt June 28, 2017. Gladiator Arenas in Assassins Creed Origins are bloody fun, but Im worried about the stupid enemies. VG 247. Retrieved September 1, 2017.
 de Rochefort, Simone October 25, 2017. Assassins Creed 2 may have given us a hint about Origins. Polygon. Retrieved January 19, 2018.
 Knezevic, Kevin January 23, 2018. DLC The Hidden Ones is out. Gamespot. Retrieved January 23, 2018.
 Orland, Kyle September 27, 2017. Combatfree mode makes Assassins Creed: Origins incredibly easy to explore. Ars Technica. Retrieved September 27, 2017.
 Assassins Creed Origins is getting an educational mode early next year. The Verge. September 27, 2017. Retrieved September 27, 2017.
 Madan, Asher January 17, 2018. Ubisoft reveals release dates for future Assassins Creed Origins story expansions. Windows Central. Retrieved January 17, 2018.
 Right on target: using video games to enhance learning. UdeMNouvelles. Retrieved 8 June 2018.
 Schwarz, Angela 2018. Bin dann mal Geschichte machen. Damals in German. Vol. 50 no. 9. pp. 5863.
 Gach, Ethan June 11, 2017. Assassins Creed Origins finally announced for real, set in Egypt. Kotaku. Gawker Media.
 A message from the Assassins Creed team. Ubisoft. February 11, 2016. Retrieved August 13, 2017.
 Macy, Seth G. February 11, 2016. Ubisoft confirms no Assassins Creed this year. IGN. Retrieved August 13, 2017.
 Assassins Creed Origins PC release date and hardware. Gamespot. Retrieved October 22, 2017.
 Robinson, Andy November 29, 2011. AC:3 Possible Locations Named In Survey. Computer and Video Games. Future plc. Archived from the original on December 1, 2011. Retrieved January 28, 2018.
 Dutton, Fred April 4, 2012. Ubisoft: WW2, Japan and Egypt would make dismal Assassins Creed locations. Eurogamer. Retrieved October 2, 2017.
 Hester, Blake August 22, 2017. Assassins Creed Origins will have the series largest map. Rolling Stone. Jann Wenner. Retrieved October 21, 2017.
 McMillan, Emily. First glimpse of Sarah Schachners Assassins Creed Origins on Billboard. Video Game Music Online. Retrieved October 20, 2017.
 Final Fantasy 15 is getting free Assassins Creed crossover DLC. Eurogamer. August 24, 2017. Retrieved September 3, 2017.
 Square Enix August 31, 2017. Final Fantasy XV. PlayStation 4, Xbox One. Square Enix. Levelarea: Lestallum Assassins Festival. Ignis: Ah, the Leap of Faith ... one of the Assassins finest acrobatic feats.
 PreOrders and Limited Editions. IGN. Retrieved August 21, 2017.
 Assassins Creed Origins for PC Reviews. Metacritic. Retrieved October 26, 2017.
 Assassins Creed Origins for PlayStation 4 Reviews. Metacritic. Retrieved October 30, 2017.
 Assassins Creed Origins for Xbox One Reviews. Metacritic. Retrieved October 26, 2017.
 Carter, Chris October 27, 2017. Review: Assassins Creed Origins. Destructoid. Retrieved October 28, 2017.
 Assassins Creed Origins. Edge. No. 313. Future. November 9, 2017. pp. 100102. ISSN 13501593.
 Carsillo, Ray October 26, 2017. Assassins Creed Origins review. EGMNow. Retrieved October 26, 2017.
 Vazquez, Suriel October 26, 2017. Keeping The Faith By Questioning It  Assassins Creed Origins  Xbox One. Game Informer. Retrieved October 26, 2017.
 Leri, Michael October 26, 2017. Assassins Creed Origins Review  Egyptian Addiction. Game Revolution. Retrieved October 26, 2017.
 Fillari, Alessandro October 26, 2017. Assassins Creed Origins Review. GameSpot. Retrieved October 26, 2017.
 Blain, Louise October 26, 2017. Assassins Creed Origins review. GamesRadar. Future plc. Retrieved October 26, 2017.
 Pearce, Alanah October 26, 2017. Assassins Creed Origins Review. IGN. Retrieved October 26, 2017.
 Livingston, Christopher November 1, 2017. Assassins Creed Origins review. PC Gamer. Retrieved November 1, 2017.
 Campbell, Colin October 26, 2017. Assassins Creed Origins review. Polygon. Retrieved October 26, 2017.
 Bell, Alice November 1, 2017. Assassins Creed Origins review. VideoGamer.com. Retrieved November 1, 2017.
 How Assassins Creed: Origins achieved amazing historical accuracy  and why thats key, Windows Central
 Assassins Creed Origins Predicted The Great Pyramid Of Giza Discovery, Forbes
 A Harvard Egyptologist Explains the Historical Accuracy of Assassins Creed: Origins, Motherboard Vice
 Eurogamer staff December 28, 2017. Eurogamers Top 50 Games of 2017: 3021. Eurogamer. Retrieved December 31, 2017.
 GamesRadar staff December 22, 2017. The best games of 2017: Page 3. GamesRadar. Future plc. Retrieved January 2, 2018.
 EGM staff December 30, 2017. EGMs Best of 2017: Part Four: 10  6. EGMNow. Retrieved January 14, 2018.
 Polygon staff December 18, 2017. The 50 best games of 2017. Polygon. Retrieved February 12, 2018.
 PC Gamer staff December 26, 2017. Best Open World Game 2017: Assassins Creed Origins. PC Gamer. Retrieved January 1, 2018.
 PC Gamer staff December 8, 2017. Games of the Year 2017: The nominees. PC Gamer. Retrieved January 1, 2018.
 Makedonski, Brett December 11, 2017. Nominees for Destructoids Best Xbox One Game of 2017. Destructoid. Retrieved January 3, 2018.
 Best of 2017 Awards: Best Xbox One Game. IGN. December 20, 2017. Retrieved December 29, 2017.
 Best of 2017 Awards: Best ActionAdventure Game. IGN. December 20, 2017. Retrieved December 29, 2017.
 Best of 2017 Awards: Best Graphics. IGN. December 20, 2017. Retrieved December 29, 2017.
 Giant Bomb staff December 27, 2017. Game of the Year 2017 Day Three: World, Wolfenstein, Moments, and PLEASE STOP. Giant Bomb. Retrieved December 27, 2017.
 Giant Bomb staff December 28, 2017. Game of the Year 2017 Day Four: Debut, New Characters, Story, and Styyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyle. Giant Bomb. Retrieved December 28, 2017.
 Miller, Matt January 5, 2018. 2017 Action Game Of The Year Awards. Game Informer. GameStop. Retrieved January 8, 2018.
 https:kotaku.comassassinscreedoriginsmetacriticfloodedwithfakepo1820039309
 Crescente, Brian November 7, 2017. Assassins Creed Origins Sells Twice as Fast as Previous Game. Rolling Stone. Jann Wenner. Retrieved November 7, 2017.
 Sarkar, Samit June 26, 2017. Mario  Rabbids, Wolfenstein 2, Shadow of War lead E3 critics nominations. Polygon. Retrieved August 13, 2017.
 Khan, Zubi August 21, 2017. Gamescom 2017 Award Nominees. CGM. Retrieved January 22, 2018.
 Super Mario Odyssey sweeps Best Of Gamescom awards. Metro. August 24, 2017. Retrieved January 22, 2018.
 Gaito, Eri November 13, 2017. Golden Joystick Awards 2017 Nominees. Best in Slot. Retrieved December 29, 2017.
 Awards  The Game Awards. The Game Awards. Retrieved 20171208.
 Steam Awards 2017 nominees announced. IGN. December 21, 2017. Retrieved November 7, 2018.
 Whitney, Kayla January 25, 2018. Complete list of winners of the New York Game Awards 2018. AXS. Retrieved January 26, 2018.
 Giardina, Carolyn January 16, 2018. Visual Effects Society Awards: Apes, Blade Runner 2049 Lead Feature Nominees. The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved January 16, 2018.
 Pedersen, Erik; Haithman, Diane February 13, 2018. VES Awards Live Blog  Winners List. Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved February 14, 2018.
 Makuch, Eddie January 14, 2018. Game Of The Year Nominees Announced for DICE Awards. GameSpot. Retrieved January 17, 2018.
 Makuch, Eddie February 22, 2018. Legend Of Zelda: Breath Of The Wild Wins Game Of The Year At DICE Awards. GameSpot. Retrieved February 24, 2018.
 Nominee List for 2017. National Academy of Video Game Trade Reviewers. February 9, 2018. Retrieved February 15, 2018.
 Horizon wins 7; Mario GOTY. National Academy of Video Game Trade Reviewers. March 13, 2018. Retrieved March 14, 2018.
 McNeill, Andrew January 31, 2018. Here Are Your 2018 SXSW Gaming Awards Finalists!. SXSW. Retrieved February 1, 2018.
 IGN Studios March 17, 2018. 2018 SXSW Gaming Awards Winners Revealed. IGN. Retrieved March 18, 2018.
 Gamasutra staff January 5, 2018. Breath of the Wild  Horizon Zero Dawn lead GDC 2018 Choice Awards nominees!. Gamasutra. Retrieved January 8, 2018.
 Makuch, Eddie March 22, 2018. Legend Of Zelda: Breath Of The Wild Wins Another Game Of The Year Award. GameSpot. Retrieved March 22, 2018.
 deAlessandri, Marie March 15, 2018. Hellblade: Senuas Sacrifice at forefront of BAFTA Games Awards nominations. The Market for Computer  Video Games. Retrieved March 15, 2018.
 Makedonski, Brett April 12, 2018. BAFTA names What Remains of Edith Finch its best game of 2017. Destructoid. Retrieved April 13, 2018.
 Vote in the 2018 ASCAP Composers Choice Awards!. American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers. April 9, 2018. Retrieved April 23, 2018.
 ASCAP May 24, 2018. Prolific Film Composer John Powell Recognized With ASCAP Henry Mancini Award; Composer And Songwriter Germaine Franco Receives ASCAP Shirley Walker Award At 2018 ASCAP Screen Music Awards. PR Newswire. Retrieved May 24, 2018.
External links
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Assassins Creed Origins.
Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Assassins Creed: Origins.
Official website
Samsung Galaxy S5 Vector.svg2010s portalPyramidi aavikolla.pngAncient Egypt portalDragon149393.svgSpeculative fiction portalWPVG icon 2016.svgVideo games portal
vte
Assassins Creed
Video games
Main series
Assassins Creed II Brotherhood Revelations III IV: Black Flag Rogue Unity Syndicate Origins Odyssey
Other games
Altars Chronicles Bloodlines II: Discovery III: Liberation Identity Chronicles
Adaptations
Novels Lineage The Fall The Chain Brahman Trial by Fire Embers Film
Characters
Desmond Miles Altar IbnLaAhad Ezio Auditore da Firenze
Related
Prince of Persia Watch Dogs Skull  Bones Soulcalibur V
Category Category
Categories: 2017 video gamesActionadventure gamesAncient Egypt in fictionAssassins CreedCultural depictions of CleopatraCultural depictions of Julius CaesarCultural depictions of Marcus Junius Brutus the YoungerOpen world video gamesPlayStation 4 gamesPlayStation 4 Pro enhanced gamesSingleplayer video gamesStealth video gamesUbisoft gamesVideo games about revengeVideo games developed in CanadaVideo games set in ancient RomeVideo games set in EgyptVideo games set in LibyaVideo games set in the 1st century BCWindows gamesXbox One gamesXbox One X enhanced gamesVideo game prequels

Assassins Creed Odyssey
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
Assassins Creed Odyssey
ACOdysseyCoverArt.png
DevelopersUbisoft Quebeca
PublishersUbisoft
Directors
Jonathan Dumont
Scott Phillips
ProducersMarcAlexis Ct
DesignersJordane Thiboust
ArtistsThierry Dansereau
Writers
Jonathan Dumont
Melissa MacCoubrey
Hugo Giard
ComposersThe Flightb
SeriesAssassins Creed
EngineAnvilNext 2.0
Platforms
Microsoft Windows
PlayStation 4
Xbox One
Nintendo Switch Japan only
ReleaseMicrosoft Windows, PlayStation 4, Xbox One
WW: October 5, 2018
Nintendo Switch
JP: October 5, 2018
GenresAction roleplaying, stealth
ModesSingleplayer
Assassins Creed Odyssey is a 2018 action roleplaying video game developed by Ubisoft Quebec and published by Ubisoft. It is the eleventh major installment, and twentieth overall, in the Assassins Creed series and the successor to 2017s Assassins Creed Origins. Set in the year 431 BCE, the plot tells a fictional history of the Peloponnesian War between Athens and Sparta. Players control a male or female mercenary Ancient Greek:  misthios who fights for both sides as they attempt to unite their family and uncover a malign cult.

The game was released worldwide for Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 4, Xbox One, and in Japan only for Nintendo Switch on October 5, 2018. It was praised for its open world, visuals, combat, story, and characters, while receiving criticism for some reliance on grinding, microtransactions, and for feeling bloated.


Contents
1Gameplay
2Story
2.1Setting
2.2Plot
3Release
3.1Editions
4Reception
4.1Sales
4.2Accolades
5Notes
6References
7External links
Gameplay
Assassins Creed Odyssey places more emphasis on roleplaying elements than previous games in the series. The game contains dialogue options, branching quests, and multiple endings.2 The player is able to choose the gender of the main character, adopting the role of Alexios or Kassandra.3 The player can also develop romantic relationships with nonplayable characters of both genders, regardless of which one they choose.41 The game features a notoriety system in which mercenaries chase after the player if they commit crimes like killing or stealing.5

The player character, Alexios or Kassandra, is a mercenary, and a descendant of the Spartan king Leonidas I. They inherit his broken spear, which is forged into a blade to become a weapon that grants the player special abilities in combat. The game uses a skill tree system that allows the player to unlock new abilities.6 The three skill trees are hunter, which improves player characters archery, warrior, which puts emphasis on combat, and assassin, which focuses on stealth. This replaces the system used in Origins, which granted the player a series of passive abilities.

The hitbox combat system introduced in Origins returns and is expanded upon to grant the player access to four different special skills when the ability bar fills up. These skills include calling a rain of arrows and a powerful kick to knock opponents offbalance,5 and are similar to the Overpower mechanic introduced in Origins that let the player use a powerful finishing move in combat. The game also features a gear system in which each piece of armor the player wears has different statistics and provides a range of advantages.7 These can be equipped and upgraded individually.

Assassins Creed Odyssey also features naval combat again, with the player having access to Hellenisticera warships to explore the Aegean Sea. The conflict between Athens and Sparta is represented through a War System which enables players to take contracts from mercenaries and participate in different largescale battles against hostile factions. The war system can change a factions influence over a region.7

Story
Setting
The game is set in 431 BCE, four hundred years before the events of Assassins Creed Origins. It recounts the secret fictional history of the Peloponnesian War, which was fought between the citystates of Greece. The player takes on the role of a mercenary and is able to fight for the Delian League, led by Athens, or the Peloponnesian League, led by Sparta.8 The games main storyline has the player character attempting to restore their fractured family after they and their sibling were thrown off a cliff in their youth and left for dead by their father by command of the Spartan oracle. Parallel quest lines deal with the extirpation of a malign cult spanning the Greek world, and the discovery of artifacts and monsters from Atlantean times.

As with previous games in the series, Odyssey features a narrative set in the modern day and follows Layla Hassan, who was introduced in Assassins Creed Origins.9

The game features a number of historical personages players can encounter and talk to, including Alkibiades, Kleon, Sokrates, Sophokles, Pausanias, Herodotos, Hippokrates, Brasidas, Perikles and Phidias.101112 It also includes historical and mythical locations such as the Agora of Athens, Kephallonia, Ithaca, the Odeon of Athens, the Foloi oak forest, the statue of Zeus at Olympia, Naxos, Lesbos, ancient Athens, ancient Argolis, Pnyx,13 Phokis and Mesara.1415

Plot
During the Battle of Thermopylae, King Leonidas leads the Spartan army against a Persian charge. The battle is won, but Leonidas is informed by a captured enemy soldier that the existence of the mountain path has been revealed to the Persian army, which is moving to surround the Spartans by morning. Nevertheless, Leonidas resolves to hold off the Persian advance.

In the present, Layla Hassan recovers the Spear of Leonidas and together with Victoria Bibeau, extracts the DNA of two individuals from it, the siblings Kassandra and Alexios. With help from the Assassins, Layla picks one of the siblings the Misthios and activates the Animus to find the location of the Staff of Hermes.

The Misthios started as a young Spartan child, raised by their parents Nikolaos and Myrrine, and inherited the Spear of Leonidas from Myrrine as one Leonidas descendants. However, one day, both the Misthios and their sibling are thrown off a mountain due to an oracles prophecy, with the Misthios being dropped by Nikolaos himself. The Misthios survived the fall and fled to the island of Kephallonia, where they grew up performing odd jobs until the Peloponnesian War begins.

The Misthios is approached by a wealthy man named Elpenor, who hires them to assassinate The Wolf of Sparta. The Misthios later discovers that the Wolf is Nikolaos himself and confronts him. Nikolaos admits that he regrets what he had done, but did so for the good of Sparta. The Misthios has the choice of executing or sparing Nikolaos, and finds out that Nikolaos is actually their stepfather and that Myrrine is in danger. The Misthios confronts Elpenor, who reveals he knew Nikolaus was their stepfather and wanted him dead in order to drag out the war. He then offers another job to assassinate Myrrine, but the Misthios refuses and Elpenor flees. The Misthios then travels to Delphi to ask the Pythia the whereabouts of Myrrine, where they encounter Herodotos, who recognizes the Spear of Leonidas the Misthios carries. Upon meeting the Pythia, the Misthios is warned about the Cult of Kosmos, who seek to kill them and their family. The Misthios further investigates the Cult by assassinating Elpenor and using his disguise to infiltrate a Cult meeting. They find that the Cult plans to take advantage of the war to seize control of all of Greece, and that their enforcer Deimos is in fact the Misthios sibling, now brainwashed to follow the Cults orders.

The Misthios continues on their journey all over Greece, clearing out Cult corruption from both Sparta and Athens and befriending powerful Greek figures such as Perikles and Aspasia. They are unable to stop Perikles assassination at the hands of Deimos, but are able to reunite with Myrrine and find their true father, Pythagoras. Myrrine and Pythagoras explain that they conceived Alexios and Kassandra to preserve Leonidas bloodline, as he and his descendants have a special connection to Precursor artifacts, such as the Spear of Leonidas. Pythagoras tasks the Misthios to recover several Precursor artifacts needed to permanently seal the hidden Precursor city of Atlantis so that its knowledge cannot be misused by enemies like the Cult. Afterwards, the Misthios manages to avenge Perikles death by assassinating his political rival, Kleon. Depending on the Misthios actions, they can convince Deimos to abandon the Cult and rebuild their family with Nikolaos, Myrrine, their sibling, and their new stepbrother Stentor living happily together in their old family home.

With war averted and the Cult virtually eliminated, the Misthios heads for the Cults secret meeting place under the Temple of Delphi to destroy the Precursor pyramid the Cult was using to influence Greek politics. Touching it, they receive visions of future conflicts to come before destroying the pyramid. Aspasia then arrives and reveals that she was the original leader of the Cult but disagreed with its actions as its members became more corrupt, and she thanks the Misthios for destroying the Cult. The Misthios has the option of killing or sparing Aspasia, but cuts ties with her regardless. Finally, the Misthios collects all of the artifacts needed to seal Atlantis, and activates a recording from the Precursor Aletheia who pleads with the Misthios and Layla that Precursor knowledge and technology is not meant for humans and must be destroyed in order for humans to reach their true potential. Pythagoras reluctantly passes the Staff of Hermes on to the Misthios, dying in the process. The Misthios then continues their adventures.

In the present, Layla uses the data from the Animus to find Atlantis and activate it. As the Assassins analyze the data within, Layla is shocked to find the Misthios, kept alive until modern times by the Staff of Hermes. The Misthios warns Layla that the world needs a balance between order and chaos, the Templar Order and Assassins respectively, and either side prevailing over the other will result in the worlds doom. The Misthios also explains that Layla is the prophesied one who will bring balance to order and chaos and gives her the Staff of Hermes, sacrificing their life in the process.

Release
Prior to the games appearance at E3 2018, Assassins Creed Odyssey was leaked in May 2018 after the French site Jeuxvideo received a keychain containing the name Assassins Creed Odyssey on it. Ubisoft announced Assassins Creed Odyssey and its appearance at the Electronic Entertainment Expo 2018 shortly thereafter.16 A day before the Ubisoft E3 press conference, screenshots of the game leaked by the gaming website Gematsu.1718 The game was released on October 5, 2018 for Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 4 and Xbox One.8

A Nintendo Switch version was announced during the Japanese September 2018 Nintendo Direct. Assassins Creed Odyssey is a cloudbased title on the Nintendo Switch, which launched on the same day as the other platforms, but in Japan only.19

The games season pass will include two DLC episodes as well as a remastered edition of Assassins Creed III.20

Editions
The following editions have been announced:2122

FeaturesStandard Edition
consoles and PCDeluxe Edition
consoles and PCGold Edition
consoles and PCUltimate Edition
consoles and PCOmega Edition
consoles only
EU onlyMedusa Edition
consoles and PC
EU onlySpartan Edition
Uplay exclusive
consoles and PCPantheon Edition
Uplay exclusive
consoles and PC
Game discYesNoPS4 and Xbox One onlyNoYesYesYesYes
Ingame content
3 days early accessNoNoYesYesNoYesYesYes
The Blind King missionYes preorder onlyYes preorder onlyYes preorder onlyYes preorder onlyYes preorder onlyYesYesYes
Secrets of Greece missionNoNoYesYesNoYesYesYes
Kronos Gear PackNoYesNoYesYesYesYesYes
Herald of Dusk Gear PackNoYesNoYesNoNoYesYes
XP and Drachma BoostNoYesYesYesYesNoYesYes
Capricornus Naval PackNoYesYesYesNoNoYesYes
Season PassNo can be purchased separatelyNo can be purchased separatelyYesYesNo can be purchased separatelyNo can be purchased separatelyYesYes
Physical content
SteelbookNoNoPS4 and Xbox One onlyNoNoNoYesYes
World MapNoNoNoNoYesYesYesYes
Official soundtrack CDNoNoNoNoNoYesYesYes
ArtbookNoNoNoNoYesYesYesYes
Exclusive packagingNoNoNoNoNoYesYesYes
FigurineNoNoNoNoNoFallen Gorgon StatueSpartan Leap StatueNemesis Diorama
Exclusive lithographNoNoNoNoNoNoYesYes
Reception
Reception
Aggregate score
AggregatorScore
MetacriticPC 8810023
PS4 8310024
XONE 8710025
Review scores
PublicationScore
EGM8.51026
Game Informer8.251028
GameSpot81029
GamesRadar55 stars27
IGN9.21030
USgamer4.55 stars31
Assassins Creed Odyssey received generally favourable reviews on all platforms, according to review aggregator Metacritic.232524

EGMNow gave the game an 8.510, writing Assassins Creed Odyssey lives up to its namesake. By fully investing in becoming an action RPG, Odysseys characters, combat, story, and scope are beyond anything the series has accomplished so far. Its ambitions might get the better of it sometimes, like in how it divides its story moments or in how the leveling system can get out of hand, but the overall experience is, simply put, epic.26

IGN praised the world building, environment and engaging gameplay and summed up its 9.210 review with Assassins Creed Odysseys openworld adventure through ancient Greece is a gorgeous thrill, and the best the series has ever been.30 GamesRadar gave it 5 out of 5 stars, praising the characters, opening world and engrossing story, saying that it perfects everything Origins did and enhances them in ways you never thought an Assassins Creed game could. Odyssey has it all.27

Sales
Within its first week on sale in Japan, the PlayStation 4 version of Assassins Creed Odyssey sold 45,166 copies.32

Accolades
YearAwardCategoryResultRef
2018Game Critics AwardsBest Console GameNominated33
Best ActionAdventure GameNominated
Gamescom 2018Best RolePlaying GameNominated34
Best Console Game PlayStation 4Nominated
Golden Joystick AwardsUltimate Game of the YearPending35
The Game Awards 2018Game of the YearPending36
Best Art DirectionPending
Best Performance Melissanthi MahutPending
Best ActionAdventure GamePending
Notes
 Additional work by Ubisoft Montreal, Ubisoft Montpellier, Ubisoft Kiev, Ubisoft Bucharest, Ubisoft Shanghai, Ubisoft Pune, Ubisoft Singapore, Sperasoft and Technicolor Games.1
 The collective name of Joe Henson and Alexis Smith
References
 Totilo, Stephen. Everything We Learned About Assassins Creed Odyssey After Playing It. Kotaku. Retrieved June 12, 2018.
 Higham, Michael; Knezevic, Kevin 11 June 2018. E3 2018: Assassins Creed Odyssey Has Branching Dialogue Choices. GameSpot. CBS Interactive Inc. Retrieved 12 June 2018.
 Goroff, Michael 6 June 2018. Report may reveal Assassins Creed Odyssey setting, main character. EGMNOW. Retrieved 12 June 2018.
 Schwartz, Terri June 11, 2018. E3 2018: Why Assassins Creed Odyssey Is Adding Romance and Character Choice to the Story. IGN. Archived from the original on 20180612. Retrieved June 12, 2018.
 Philips, Tom June 11, 2016. Three hours with Assassins Creed Odyssey. Eurogamer. Retrieved June 12, 2018.
 Wright, Steve 12 June 2018. Assassins Creed Odyssey skill tree has Warrior, Assassin and Hunter paths. Stevivor. Retrieved 12 June 2018.
 Gartenberg, Chaim June 11, 2018. Assassins Creed: Odyssey is even more of a traditional RPG than last years Origins. The Verge. Retrieved June 12, 2018.
 Ryan, Jon June 11, 2018. E3 2018: Assassins Creed Odyssey Release Date, Gameplay Details Revealed. IGN. Archived from the original on 20180612. Retrieved June 12, 2018.
 Fogel, Stefanie June 11, 2018. New Assassins Creed Odyssey Details Drop. Variety. Retrieved June 12, 2018.
 Dingman, Hayden 5 October 2018. Assassins Creed Odyssey review in progress: This ancient adventure breathes new life into the series. PC Gamer. IDG Communications, Inc. Retrieved 11 October 2018.
 Nedd, Alexis 11 July 2018. 7 ancient Greeks who might be your friend in Assassins Creed: Odyssey. Mashable. Ziff Davis, LLC. Retrieved 11 October 2018.
 Campbell, Colin 11 October 2018. Assassins Creed Odysseys best historical characters. Polygon. Retrieved 12 October 2018.
 Ryan, Jon 16 August 2018. Assassins Creed Odyssey: ReBuilding Athens. IGN Entertainment, Inc. Ziff Davis. Retrieved 10 November 2018.
 Dingman, Hayden 11 October 2018. Assassins Creed: Odysseys hidden Historical Locations map is stuffed with Ancient Greek lore. PC World. IDG Communications, Inc. Retrieved 4 November 2018.
 Grodt, Jill 3 October 2018. The Stories Behind Assassin Creed Odysseys Mythical Locations. Game Informer. Retrieved 4 November 2018.
 Phillips, Tom. Assassins Creed Odyssey has leaked via a keyring. Eurogamer.net. Retrieved June 12, 2018.
 Kain, Erik. First Assassins Creed Odyssey Screenshots Leak Ahead Of E3. Forbes. Retrieved June 12, 2018.
 Assassins Creed Odyssey screenshots leaked  Gematsu. Gematsu. June 10, 2018. Archived from the original on June 10, 2018. Retrieved June 12, 2018.
 McFerran, Damien September 14, 2018. Assassins Creed Odyssey Is Coming To Nintendo Switch, But Theres A Catch. Nintendo Life. Retrieved September 14, 2018.
 Knezevic, Kevin 18 September 2018. Assassins Creed Odyssey Season Pass Announced, Includes Remastered Assassins Creed 3 And More. GameSpot. CBS Interactive Inc. Retrieved 26 September 2018.
 Knoop, Joseph June 11, 2018. Assassins Creed Odyssey Special editions announced. IGN. Retrieved September 17, 2018.
 Wallace, Jamie June 12, 2018. has upwards of four special editions. Eurogamer. Retrieved September 17, 2018.
 Assassins Creed Odyssey for PC Reviews. Metacritic. Retrieved October 7, 2018.
 Assassins Creed Odyssey for PlayStation 4 Reviews. Metacritic. Retrieved October 7, 2018.
 Assassins Creed Odyssey for Xbox One Reviews. Metacritic. Retrieved October 7, 2018.
 Goroff, Michael October 1, 2018. Assassins Creed Odyssey Review. EGMNow. Retrieved October 1, 2018.
 Loveridge9, Sam October 1, 2018. Assassins Creed Odyssey review: Noones made an openworld RPG with this much depth and brilliance since The Witcher 3. GamesRadar. Retrieved October 1, 2018.
 Juba, Joe October 1, 2018. Assassins Creed Odyssey  Fighting For Glory  PlayStation 4. Game Informer. Retrieved October 1, 2018.
 Fillari, Alessandro October 1, 2018. Assassins Creed Odyssey Review  A Mighty Adventure. GameSpot. Retrieved October 1, 2018.
 Tyrrel, Brandin October 1, 2018. Assassins Creed Odyssey Review. IGN. Retrieved October 1, 2018.
 Williams, Mike October 1, 2018. Assassins Creed Odyssey review. USGamer. Retrieved October 1, 2018.
 Romano, Sal October 10, 2018. Media Create Sales: 10118  10718. Gematsu. Retrieved November 3, 2018.
 Watts, Steve July 2, 2018. Resident Evil 2 Wins E3 Game Critics Awards Top Honor. GameSpot. Retrieved November 15, 2018.
 Keane, Sean August 22, 2018. Gamescom 2018 award winners include Marvels SpiderMan, Super Smash Bros. Ultimate. CNET. Retrieved November 15, 2018.
 Andronico, Michael October 26, 2018. Golden Joystick Awards: Vote for Ultimate Game of the Year. Toms Guide. Retrieved November 15, 2018.
 McWhertor, Michael November 13, 2018. The Game Awards 2018 nominees led by God of War, Red Dead Redemption 2. Polygon. Retrieved November 15, 2018.
External links
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Assassins Creed Odyssey.
Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Assassins Creed Odyssey.
Official website
Samsung Galaxy S5 Vector.svg2010s portalParthenon from west.jpgAncient Greece portalDragon149393.svgSpeculative fiction portalWPVG icon 2016.svgVideo games portal
vte
Assassins Creed
Video games
Main series
Assassins Creed II Brotherhood Revelations III IV: Black Flag Rogue Unity Syndicate Origins Odyssey
Other games
Altars Chronicles Bloodlines II: Discovery III: Liberation Identity Chronicles
Adaptations
Novels Lineage The Fall The Chain Brahman Trial by Fire Embers Film
Characters
Desmond Miles Altar IbnLaAhad Ezio Auditore da Firenze
Related
Prince of Persia Watch Dogs Skull  Bones Soulcalibur V
Category Category
Categories: 2018 video gamesAction roleplaying video gamesAssassins CreedLGBTrelated video gamesNintendo Switch eShop gamesOpen world video gamesPlayStation 4 gamesPlayStation 4 Pro enhanced gamesStealth video gamesUbisoft gamesVideo games developed in CanadaWindows gamesXbox One gamesXbox One X enhanced gamesVideo games set in antiquityVideo games set in GreeceVideo game prequels

Deep learning
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
For deep versus shallow learning in educational psychology, see Student approaches to learning. For more information, see Artificial neural network.
Machine learning and
data mining
Kernel Machine.svg
Problemsshow
Supervised learning
classification  regression
show
Clusteringshow
Dimensionality reductionshow
Structured predictionshow
Anomaly detectionshow
Artificial neural networksshow
Reinforcement learningshow
Theoryshow
Machinelearning venuesshow
Glossary of artificial intelligenceshow
Related articlesshow
Portalpuzzle.svg Machine learning portal
vte
Deep learning also known as deep structured learning or hierarchical learning is part of a broader family of machine learning methods based on learning data representations, as opposed to taskspecific algorithms. Learning can be supervised, semisupervised or unsupervised.123

Deep learning architectures such as deep neural networks, deep belief networks and recurrent neural networks have been applied to fields including computer vision, speech recognition, natural language processing, audio recognition, social network filtering, machine translation, bioinformatics, drug design, medical image analysis , material inspection and board game programs, where they have produced results comparable to and in some cases superior to human experts.456

Deep learning models are vaguely inspired by information processing and communication patterns in biological nervous systems yet have various differences from the structural and functional properties of biological brains especially human brains, which make them incompatible with neuroscience evidences.789


Contents
1Definition
2Overview
3Interpretations
4History
4.1Deep learning revolution
5Neural networks
5.1Artificial neural networks
5.2Deep neural networks
6Applications
6.1Automatic speech recognition
6.2Image recognition
6.3Visual art processing
6.4Natural language processing
6.5Drug discovery and toxicology
6.6Customer relationship management
6.7Recommendation systems
6.8Bioinformatics
6.9Mobile advertising
6.10Image restoration
6.11Financial fraud detection
6.12Military
7Relation to human cognitive and brain development
8Commercial activity
9Criticism and comment
9.1Theory
9.2Errors
9.3Cyberthreat
10See also
11References
12External links
Definition
Deep learning is a class of machine learning algorithms that:10pp199200

use a cascade of multiple layers of nonlinear processing units for feature extraction and transformation. Each successive layer uses the output from the previous layer as input.
learn in supervised e.g., classification andor unsupervised e.g., pattern analysis manners.
learn multiple levels of representations that correspond to different levels of abstraction; the levels form a hierarchy of concepts.
Overview
Most modern deep learning models are based on an artificial neural network, although they can also include propositional formulas or latent variables organized layerwise in deep generative models such as the nodes in deep belief networks and deep Boltzmann machines.11

In deep learning, each level learns to transform its input data into a slightly more abstract and composite representation. In an image recognition application, the raw input may be a matrix of pixels; the first representational layer may abstract the pixels and encode edges; the second layer may compose and encode arrangements of edges; the third layer may encode a nose and eyes; and the fourth layer may recognize that the image contains a face. Importantly, a deep learning process can learn which features to optimally place in which level on its own. Of course, this does not completely obviate the need for handtuning; for example, varying numbers of layers and layer sizes can provide different degrees of abstraction.112

The deep in deep learning refers to the number of layers through which the data is transformed. More precisely, deep learning systems have a substantial credit assignment path CAP depth. The CAP is the chain of transformations from input to output. CAPs describe potentially causal connections between input and output. For a feedforward neural network, the depth of the CAPs is that of the network and is the number of hidden layers plus one as the output layer is also parameterized. For recurrent neural networks, in which a signal may propagate through a layer more than once, the CAP depth is potentially unlimited.2 No universally agreed upon threshold of depth divides shallow learning from deep learning, but most researchers agree that deep learning involves CAP depth  2. CAP of depth 2 has been shown to be a universal approximator in the sense that it can emulate any function.citation needed Beyond that more layers do not add to the function approximator ability of the network. Deep models CAP  2 are able to extract better features than shallow models and hence, extra layers help in learning features.

Deep learning architectures are often constructed with a greedy layerbylayer method.clarification neededfurther explanation neededcitation needed Deep learning helps to disentangle these abstractions and pick out which features improve performance.1

For supervised learning tasks, deep learning methods obviate feature engineering, by translating the data into compact intermediate representations akin to principal components, and derive layered structures that remove redundancy in representation.

Deep learning algorithms can be applied to unsupervised learning tasks. This is an important benefit because unlabeled data are more abundant than labeled data. Examples of deep structures that can be trained in an unsupervised manner are neural history compressors13 and deep belief networks.114

Interpretations
Deep neural networks are generally interpreted in terms of the universal approximation theorem1516171819 or probabilistic inference.101112142021

The universal approximation theorem concerns the capacity of feedforward neural networks with a single hidden layer of finite size to approximate continuous functions.1516171819 In 1989, the first proof was published by George Cybenko for sigmoid activation functions16 and was generalised to feedforward multilayer architectures in 1991 by Kurt Hornik.17

The probabilistic interpretation20 derives from the field of machine learning. It features inference,1011121420 as well as the optimization concepts of training and testing, related to fitting and generalization, respectively. More specifically, the probabilistic interpretation considers the activation nonlinearity as a cumulative distribution function.20 The probabilistic interpretation led to the introduction of dropout as regularizer in neural networks.22 The probabilistic interpretation was introduced by researchers including Hopfield, Widrow and Narendra and popularized in surveys such as the one by Bishop.23

History
The term Deep Learning was introduced to the machine learning community by Rina Dechter in 1986,2413 and to artificial neural networks by Igor Aizenberg and colleagues in 2000, in the context of Boolean threshold neurons.2526

The first general, working learning algorithm for supervised, deep, feedforward, multilayer perceptrons was published by Alexey Ivakhnenko and Lapa in 1965.27 A 1971 paper described a deep network with 8 layers trained by the group method of data handling algorithm.28

Other deep learning working architectures, specifically those built for computer vision, began with the Neocognitron introduced by Kunihiko Fukushima in 1980.29 In 1989, Yann LeCun et al. applied the standard backpropagation algorithm, which had been around as the reverse mode of automatic differentiation since 1970,30313233 to a deep neural network with the purpose of recognizing handwritten ZIP codes on mail. While the algorithm worked, training required 3 days.34

By 1991 such systems were used for recognizing isolated 2D handwritten digits, while recognizing 3D objects was done by matching 2D images with a handcrafted 3D object model. Weng et al. suggested that a human brain does not use a monolithic 3D object model and in 1992 they published Cresceptron,353637 a method for performing 3D object recognition in cluttered scenes. Because it directly used natural images, Cresceptron started the beginning of generalpurpose visual learning for natural 3D worlds. Cresceptron is a cascade of layers similar to Neocognitron. But while Neocognitron required a human programmer to handmerge features, Cresceptron learned an open number of features in each layer without supervision, where each feature is represented by a convolution kernel. Cresceptron segmented each learned object from a cluttered scene through backanalysis through the network. Max pooling, now often adopted by deep neural networks e.g. ImageNet tests, was first used in Cresceptron to reduce the position resolution by a factor of 2x2 to 1 through the cascade for better generalization.

In 1994, Andr de Carvalho, together with Mike Fairhurst and David Bisset, published experimental results of a multilayer boolean neural network, also known as a weightless neural network, composed of a 3layers selforganising feature extraction neural network module SOFT followed by a multilayer classification neural network module GSN, which were independently trained. Each layer in the feature extraction module extracted features with growing complexity regarding the previous layer.38

In 1995, Brendan Frey demonstrated that it was possible to train over two days a network containing six fully connected layers and several hundred hidden units using the wakesleep algorithm, codeveloped with Peter Dayan and Hinton.39 Many factors contribute to the slow speed, including the vanishing gradient problem analyzed in 1991 by Sepp Hochreiter.4041

Simpler models that use taskspecific handcrafted features such as Gabor filters and support vector machines SVMs were a popular choice in the 1990s and 2000s, because of ANNs computational cost and a lack of understanding of how the brain wires its biological networks.

Both shallow and deep learning e.g., recurrent nets of ANNs have been explored for many years.424344 These methods never outperformed nonuniform internalhandcrafting Gaussian mixture modelHidden Markov model GMMHMM technology based on generative models of speech trained discriminatively.45 Key difficulties have been analyzed, including gradient diminishing40 and weak temporal correlation structure in neural predictive models.4647 Additional difficulties were the lack of training data and limited computing power.

Most speech recognition researchers moved away from neural nets to pursue generative modeling. An exception was at SRI International in the late 1990s. Funded by the US governments NSA and DARPA, SRI studied deep neural networks in speech and speaker recognition. Hecks speaker recognition team achieved the first significant success with deep neural networks in speech processing in the 1998 National Institute of Standards and Technology Speaker Recognition evaluation.48 While SRI experienced success with deep neural networks in speaker recognition, they were unsuccessful in demonstrating similar success in speech recognition. The principle of elevating raw features over handcrafted optimization was first explored successfully in the architecture of deep autoencoder on the raw spectrogram or linear filterbank features in the late 1990s,48 showing its superiority over the MelCepstral features that contain stages of fixed transformation from spectrograms. The raw features of speech, waveforms, later produced excellent largerscale results.49

Many aspects of speech recognition were taken over by a deep learning method called long shortterm memory LSTM, a recurrent neural network published by Hochreiter and Schmidhuber in 1997.50 LSTM RNNs avoid the vanishing gradient problem and can learn Very Deep Learning tasks2 that require memories of events that happened thousands of discrete time steps before, which is important for speech. In 2003, LSTM started to become competitive with traditional speech recognizers on certain tasks.51 Later it was combined with connectionist temporal classification CTC52 in stacks of LSTM RNNs.53 In 2015, Googles speech recognition reportedly experienced a dramatic performance jump of 49 through CTCtrained LSTM, which they made available through Google Voice Search.54

In 2006, publications by Geoff Hinton, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Osindero and Teh55 5657 showed how a manylayered feedforward neural network could be effectively pretrained one layer at a time, treating each layer in turn as an unsupervised restricted Boltzmann machine, then finetuning it using supervised backpropagation.58 The papers referred to learning for deep belief nets.

Deep learning is part of stateoftheart systems in various disciplines, particularly computer vision and automatic speech recognition ASR. Results on commonly used evaluation sets such as TIMIT ASR and MNIST image classification, as well as a range of largevocabulary speech recognition tasks have steadily improved.596061 Convolutional neural networks CNNs were superseded for ASR by CTC52 for LSTM.50546263646566 but are more successful in computer vision.

The impact of deep learning in industry began in the early 2000s, when CNNs already processed an estimated 10 to 20 of all the checks written in the US, according to Yann LeCun.67 Industrial applications of deep learning to largescale speech recognition started around 2010.

The 2009 NIPS Workshop on Deep Learning for Speech Recognition68 was motivated by the limitations of deep generative models of speech, and the possibility that given more capable hardware and largescale data sets that deep neural nets DNN might become practical. It was believed that pretraining DNNs using generative models of deep belief nets DBN would overcome the main difficulties of neural nets.69 However, it was discovered that replacing pretraining with large amounts of training data for straightforward backpropagation when using DNNs with large, contextdependent output layers produced error rates dramatically lower than thenstateoftheart Gaussian mixture model GMMHidden Markov Model HMM and also than moreadvanced generative modelbased systems.5970 The nature of the recognition errors produced by the two types of systems was characteristically different,7168 offering technical insights into how to integrate deep learning into the existing highly efficient, runtime speech decoding system deployed by all major speech recognition systems.107273 Analysis around 20092010, contrasted the GMM and other generative speech models vs. DNN models, stimulated early industrial investment in deep learning for speech recognition,7168 eventually leading to pervasive and dominant use in that industry. That analysis was done with comparable performance less than 1.5 in error rate between discriminative DNNs and generative models.59716974

In 2010, researchers extended deep learning from TIMIT to large vocabulary speech recognition, by adopting large output layers of the DNN based on contextdependent HMM states constructed by decision trees.75767772

Advances in hardware enabled the renewed interest. In 2009, Nvidia was involved in what was called the big bang of deep learning, as deeplearning neural networks were trained with Nvidia graphics processing units GPUs.78 That year, Google Brain used Nvidia GPUs to create capable DNNs. While there, Ng determined that GPUs could increase the speed of deeplearning systems by about 100 times.79 In particular, GPUs are wellsuited for the matrixvector math involved in machine learning.8081 GPUs speed up training algorithms by orders of magnitude, reducing running times from weeks to days.8283 Specialized hardware and algorithm optimizations can be used for efficient processing.84

Deep learning revolution
In 2012, a team led by Dahl won the Merck Molecular Activity Challenge using multitask deep neural networks to predict the biomolecular target of one drug.8586 In 2014, Hochreiters group used deep learning to detect offtarget and toxic effects of environmental chemicals in nutrients, household products and drugs and won the Tox21 Data Challenge of NIH, FDA and NCATS.878889

Significant additional impacts in image or object recognition were felt from 2011 to 2012. Although CNNs trained by backpropagation had been around for decades, and GPU implementations of NNs for years, including CNNs, fast implementations of CNNs with maxpooling on GPUs in the style of Ciresan and colleagues were needed to progress on computer vision.808134902 In 2011, this approach achieved for the first time superhuman performance in a visual pattern recognition contest. Also in 2011, it won the ICDAR Chinese handwriting contest, and in May 2012, it won the ISBI image segmentation contest.91 Until 2011, CNNs did not play a major role at computer vision conferences, but in June 2012, a paper by Ciresan et al. at the leading conference CVPR4 showed how maxpooling CNNs on GPU can dramatically improve many vision benchmark records. In October 2012, a similar system by Krizhevsky et al.5 won the largescale ImageNet competition by a significant margin over shallow machine learning methods. In November 2012, Ciresan et al.s system also won the ICPR contest on analysis of large medical images for cancer detection, and in the following year also the MICCAI Grand Challenge on the same topic.92 In 2013 and 2014, the error rate on the ImageNet task using deep learning was further reduced, following a similar trend in largescale speech recognition. The Wolfram Image Identification project publicized these improvements.93

Image classification was then extended to the more challenging task of generating descriptions captions for images, often as a combination of CNNs and LSTMs.94959697

Some researchers assess that the October 2012 ImageNet victory anchored the start of a deep learning revolution that has transformed the AI industry.98

Neural networks
Artificial neural networks
Main article: Artificial neural network
Artificial neural networks ANNs or connectionist systems are computing systems inspired by the biological neural networks that constitute animal brains. Such systems learn progressively improve their ability to do tasks by considering examples, generally without taskspecific programming. For example, in image recognition, they might learn to identify images that contain cats by analyzing example images that have been manually labeled as cat or no cat and using the analytic results to identify cats in other images. They have found most use in applications difficult to express with a traditional computer algorithm using rulebased programming.

An ANN is based on a collection of connected units called artificial neurons, analogous to biological neurons in a biological brain. Each connection synapse between neurons can transmit a signal to another neuron. The receiving postsynaptic neuron can process the signals and then signal downstream neurons connected to it. Neurons may have state, generally represented by real numbers, typically between 0 and 1. Neurons and synapses may also have a weight that varies as learning proceeds, which can increase or decrease the strength of the signal that it sends downstream.

Typically, neurons are organized in layers. Different layers may perform different kinds of transformations on their inputs. Signals travel from the first input, to the last output layer, possibly after traversing the layers multiple times.

The original goal of the neural network approach was to solve problems in the same way that a human brain would. Over time, attention focused on matching specific mental abilities, leading to deviations from biology such as backpropagation, or passing information in the reverse direction and adjusting the network to reflect that information.

Neural networks have been used on a variety of tasks, including computer vision, speech recognition, machine translation, social network filtering, playing board and video games and medical diagnosis.

As of 2017, neural networks typically have a few thousand to a few million units and millions of connections. Despite this number being several order of magnitude less than the number of neurons on a human brain, these networks can perform many tasks at a level beyond that of humans e.g., recognizing faces, playing Go99 .

Deep neural networks

This section may be too technical for most readers to understand. Please help improve it to make it understandable to nonexperts, without removing the technical details. July 2016 Learn how and when to remove this template message
A deep neural network DNN is an artificial neural network ANN with multiple layers between the input and output layers.112 The DNN finds the correct mathematical manipulation to turn the input into the output, whether it be a linear relationship or a nonlinear relationship. The network moves through the layers calculating the probability of each output. For example, a DNN that is trained to recognize dog breeds will go over the given image and calculate the probability that the dog in the image is a certain breed. The user can review the results and select which probabilities the network should display above a certain threshold, etc. and return the proposed label. Each mathematical manipulation as such is considered a layer, and complex DNN have many layers, hence the name deep networks. The goal is that eventually, the network will be trained to decompose an image into features, identify trends that exist across all samples and classify new images by their similarities without requiring human input.100

DNNs can model complex nonlinear relationships. DNN architectures generate compositional models where the object is expressed as a layered composition of primitives.101 The extra layers enable composition of features from lower layers, potentially modeling complex data with fewer units than a similarly performing shallow network.11

Deep architectures include many variants of a few basic approaches. Each architecture has found success in specific domains. It is not always possible to compare the performance of multiple architectures, unless they have been evaluated on the same data sets.

DNNs are typically feedforward networks in which data flows from the input layer to the output layer without looping back. At first, the DNN creates a map of virtual neurons and assigns random numerical values, or weights, to connections between them. The weights and inputs are multiplied and return an output between 0 and 1. If the network didnt accurately recognize a particular pattern, an algorithm would adjust the weights.102 That way the algorithm can make certain parameters more influential, until it determines the correct mathematical manipulation to fully process the data.

Recurrent neural networks RNNs, in which data can flow in any direction, are used for applications such as language modeling.103104105106107 Long shortterm memory is particularly effective for this use.50108

Convolutional deep neural networks CNNs are used in computer vision.109 CNNs also have been applied to acoustic modeling for automatic speech recognition ASR.66

Challenges
As with ANNs, many issues can arise with naively trained DNNs. Two common issues are overfitting and computation time.

DNNs are prone to overfitting because of the added layers of abstraction, which allow them to model rare dependencies in the training data. Regularization methods such as Ivakhnenkos unit pruning28 or weight decay  displaystyle ell 2 ell 2regularization or sparsity  displaystyle ell 1 ell 1regularization can be applied during training to combat overfitting.110 Alternatively dropout regularization randomly omits units from the hidden layers during training. This helps to exclude rare dependencies.111 Finally, data can be augmented via methods such as cropping and rotating such that smaller training sets can be increased in size to reduce the chances of overfitting.112

DNNs must consider many training parameters, such as the size number of layers and number of units per layer, the learning rate, and initial weights. Sweeping through the parameter space for optimal parameters may not be feasible due to the cost in time and computational resources. Various tricks, such as batching computing the gradient on several training examples at once rather than individual examples113 speed up computation. Large processing capabilities of manycore architectures such as, GPUs or the Intel Xeon Phi have produced significant speedups in training, because of the suitability of such processing architectures for the matrix and vector computations.114115

Alternatively, engineers may look for other types of neural networks with more straightforward and convergent training algorithms. CMAC cerebellar model articulation controller is one such kind of neural network. It doesnt require learning rates or randomized initial weights for CMAC. The training process can be guaranteed to converge in one step with a new batch of data, and the computational complexity of the training algorithm is linear with respect to the number of neurons involved.116117

Applications

It has been suggested that this section be split out into another article titled Applications of Deep Learning. Discuss June 2018
Automatic speech recognition
Main article: Speech recognition
Largescale automatic speech recognition is the first and most convincing successful case of deep learning. LSTM RNNs can learn Very Deep Learning tasks2 that involve multisecond intervals containing speech events separated by thousands of discrete time steps, where one time step corresponds to about 10 ms. LSTM with forget gates108 is competitive with traditional speech recognizers on certain tasks.51

The initial success in speech recognition was based on smallscale recognition tasks based on TIMIT. The data set contains 630 speakers from eight major dialects of American English, where each speaker reads 10 sentences.118 Its small size lets many configurations be tried. More importantly, the TIMIT task concerns phonesequence recognition, which, unlike wordsequence recognition, allows weak phone bigram language models. This lets the strength of the acoustic modeling aspects of speech recognition be more easily analyzed. The error rates listed below, including these early results and measured as percent phone error rates PER, have been summarized since 1991.

MethodPER 
Randomly Initialized RNN11926.1
Bayesian Triphone GMMHMM25.6
Hidden Trajectory Generative Model24.8
Monophone Randomly Initialized DNN23.4
Monophone DBNDNN22.4
Triphone GMMHMM with BMMI Training21.7
Monophone DBNDNN on fbank20.7
Convolutional DNN12020.0
Convolutional DNN w. Heterogeneous Pooling18.7
Ensemble DNNCNNRNN12118.3
Bidirectional LSTM17.9
Hierarchical Convolutional Deep Maxout Network12216.5
The debut of DNNs for speaker recognition in the late 1990s and speech recognition around 20092011 and of LSTM around 20032007, accelerated progress in eight major areas:107472

Scaleupout and acclerated DNN training and decoding
Sequence discriminative training
Feature processing by deep models with solid understanding of the underlying mechanisms
Adaptation of DNNs and related deep models
Multitask and transfer learning by DNNs and related deep models
CNNs and how to design them to best exploit domain knowledge of speech
RNN and its rich LSTM variants
Other types of deep models including tensorbased models and integrated deep generativediscriminative models.
All major commercial speech recognition systems e.g., Microsoft Cortana, Xbox, Skype Translator, Amazon Alexa, Google Now, Apple Siri, Baidu and iFlyTek voice search, and a range of Nuance speech products, etc. are based on deep learning.10123124125

Image recognition
Main article: Computer vision
A common evaluation set for image classification is the MNIST database data set. MNIST is composed of handwritten digits and includes 60,000 training examples and 10,000 test examples. As with TIMIT, its small size lets users test multiple configurations. A comprehensive list of results on this set is available.126

Deep learningbased image recognition has become superhuman, producing more accurate results than human contestants. This first occurred in 2011.127

Deep learningtrained vehicles now interpret 360 camera views.128 Another example is Facial Dysmorphology Novel Analysis FDNA used to analyze cases of human malformation connected to a large database of genetic syndromes.

Visual art processing
Closely related to the progress that has been made in image recognition is the increasing application of deep learning techniques to various visual art tasks. DNNs have proven themselves capable, for example, of a identifying the style period of a given painting, b capturing the style of a given painting and applying it in a visually pleasing manner to an arbitrary photograph, and c generating striking imagery based on random visual input fields.129130

Natural language processing
Main article: Natural language processing
Neural networks have been used for implementing language models since the early 2000s.103131 LSTM helped to improve machine translation and language modeling.104105106

Other key techniques in this field are negative sampling132 and word embedding. Word embedding, such as word2vec, can be thought of as a representational layer in a deep learning architecture that transforms an atomic word into a positional representation of the word relative to other words in the dataset; the position is represented as a point in a vector space. Using word embedding as an RNN input layer allows the network to parse sentences and phrases using an effective compositional vector grammar. A compositional vector grammar can be thought of as probabilistic context free grammar PCFG implemented by an RNN.133 Recursive autoencoders built atop word embeddings can assess sentence similarity and detect paraphrasing.133 Deep neural architectures provide the best results for constituency parsing,134 sentiment analysis,135 information retrieval,136137 spoken language understanding,138 machine translation,104139 contextual entity linking,139 writing style recognition,140 Text classification and others.141

Recent developments generalize word embedding to sentence embedding.

Google Translate GT uses a large endtoend long shortterm memory network.142143144145146147 Google Neural Machine Translation GNMT uses an examplebased machine translation method in which the system learns from millions of examples.143 It translates whole sentences at a time, rather than pieces. Google Translate supports over one hundred languages.143 The network encodes the semantics of the sentence rather than simply memorizing phrasetophrase translations.143148 GT uses English as an intermediate between most language pairs.148

Drug discovery and toxicology
For more information, see Drug discovery and Toxicology.
A large percentage of candidate drugs fail to win regulatory approval. These failures are caused by insufficient efficacy ontarget effect, undesired interactions offtarget effects, or unanticipated toxic effects.149150 Research has explored use of deep learning to predict the biomolecular targets,8586 offtargets, and toxic effects of environmental chemicals in nutrients, household products and drugs.878889

AtomNet is a deep learning system for structurebased rational drug design.151 AtomNet was used to predict novel candidate biomolecules for disease targets such as the Ebola virus152 and multiple sclerosis.153154

Customer relationship management
Main article: Customer relationship management
Deep reinforcement learning has been used to approximate the value of possible direct marketing actions, defined in terms of RFM variables. The estimated value function was shown to have a natural interpretation as customer lifetime value.155

Recommendation systems
Main article: Recommender system
Recommendation systems have used deep learning to extract meaningful features for a latent factor model for contentbased music recommendations.156 Multiview deep learning has been applied for learning user preferences from multiple domains.157 The model uses a hybrid collaborative and contentbased approach and enhances recommendations in multiple tasks.

Bioinformatics
Main article: Bioinformatics
An autoencoder ANN was used in bioinformatics, to predict gene ontology annotations and genefunction relationships.158

In medical informatics, deep learning was used to predict sleep quality based on data from wearables159 and predictions of health complications from electronic health record data.160 Deep learning has also showed efficacy in healthcare.161

Mobile advertising
Finding the appropriate mobile audience for mobile advertising is always challenging, since many data points must be considered and assimilated before a target segment can be created and used in ad serving by any ad server.162163 Deep learning has been used to interpret large, manydimensioned advertising datasets. Many data points are collected during the requestserveclick internet advertising cycle. This information can form the basis of machine learning to improve ad selection.

Image restoration
Deep learning has been successfully applied to inverse problems such as denoising, superresolution, inpainting, and film colorization. These applications include learning methods such as Shrinkage Fields for Effective Image Restoration164 which trains on an image dataset, and Deep Image Prior, which trains on the image that needs restoration.

Financial fraud detection
Deep learning is being successfully applied to financial fraud detection and antimoney laundering. Deep antimoney laundering detection system can spot and recognize relationships and similarities between data and, further down the road, learn to detect anomalies or classify and predict specific events. The solution leverages both supervised learning techniques, such as the classification of suspicious transactions, and unsupervised learning, e.g. anomaly detection. 165

Military
The Department of Defense applied deep learning to train robots in new tasks through observation.166

Relation to human cognitive and brain development
Deep learning is closely related to a class of theories of brain development specifically, neocortical development proposed by cognitive neuroscientists in the early 1990s.167168169170 These developmental theories were instantiated in computational models, making them predecessors of deep learning systems. These developmental models share the property that various proposed learning dynamics in the brain e.g., a wave of nerve growth factor support the selforganization somewhat analogous to the neural networks utilized in deep learning models. Like the neocortex, neural networks employ a hierarchy of layered filters in which each layer considers information from a prior layer or the operating environment, and then passes its output and possibly the original input, to other layers. This process yields a selforganizing stack of transducers, welltuned to their operating environment. A 1995 description stated, ...the infants brain seems to organize itself under the influence of waves of socalled trophicfactors ... different regions of the brain become connected sequentially, with one layer of tissue maturing before another and so on until the whole brain is mature.171

A variety of approaches have been used to investigate the plausibility of deep learning models from a neurobiological perspective. On the one hand, several variants of the backpropagation algorithm have been proposed in order to increase its processing realism.172173 Other researchers have argued that unsupervised forms of deep learning, such as those based on hierarchical generative models and deep belief networks, may be closer to biological reality.174175 In this respect, generative neural network models have been related to neurobiological evidence about samplingbased processing in the cerebral cortex.176

Although a systematic comparison between the human brain organization and the neuronal encoding in deep networks has not yet been established, several analogies have been reported. For example, the computations performed by deep learning units could be similar to those of actual neurons177178 and neural populations.179 Similarly, the representations developed by deep learning models are similar to those measured in the primate visual system180 both at the singleunit181 and at the population182 levels.

Commercial activity
Many organizations employ deep learning for particular applications. Facebooks AI lab performs tasks such as automatically tagging uploaded pictures with the names of the people in them.183

Googles DeepMind Technologies developed a system capable of learning how to play Atari video games using only pixels as data input. In 2015 they demonstrated their AlphaGo system, which learned the game of Go well enough to beat a professional Go player.184185186 Google Translate uses an LSTM to translate between more than 100 languages.

In 2015, Blippar demonstrated a mobile augmented reality application that uses deep learning to recognize objects in real time.187

As of 2008,188 researchers at The University of Texas at Austin UT developed a machine learning framework called Training an Agent Manually via Evaluative Reinforcement, or TAMER, which proposed new methods for robots or computer programs to learn how to perform tasks by interacting with a human instructor.166

First developed as TAMER, a new algorithm called Deep TAMER was later introduced in 2018 during a collaboration between U.S. Army Research Laboratory ARL and UT researchers. Deep TAMER used deep learning to provide a robot the ability to learn new tasks through observation.166

Using Deep TAMER, a robot learned a task with a human trainer, watching video streams or observing a human perform a task inperson. The robot later practiced the task with the help of some coaching from the trainer, who provided feedback such as good job and bad job.189

Criticism and comment
Deep learning has attracted both criticism and comment, in some cases from outside the field of computer science.

Theory
See also: Explainable AI
A main criticism concerns the lack of theory surrounding some methods.190 Learning in the most common deep architectures is implemented using wellunderstood gradient descent. However, the theory surrounding other algorithms, such as contrastive divergence is less clear.citation needed e.g., Does it converge? If so, how fast? What is it approximating? Deep learning methods are often looked at as a black box, with most confirmations done empirically, rather than theoretically.191

Others point out that deep learning should be looked at as a step towards realizing strong AI, not as an allencompassing solution. Despite the power of deep learning methods, they still lack much of the functionality needed for realizing this goal entirely. Research psychologist Gary Marcus noted:

Realistically, deep learning is only part of the larger challenge of building intelligent machines. Such techniques lack ways of representing causal relationships ... have no obvious ways of performing logical inferences, and they are also still a long way from integrating abstract knowledge, such as information about what objects are, what they are for, and how they are typically used. The most powerful A.I. systems, like Watson ... use techniques like deep learning as just one element in a very complicated ensemble of techniques, ranging from the statistical technique of Bayesian inference to deductive reasoning.192

As an alternative to this emphasis on the limits of deep learning, one author speculated that it might be possible to train a machine vision stack to perform the sophisticated task of discriminating between old master and amateur figure drawings, and hypothesized that such a sensitivity might represent the rudiments of a nontrivial machine empathy.193 This same author proposed that this would be in line with anthropology, which identifies a concern with aesthetics as a key element of behavioral modernity.194

In further reference to the idea that artistic sensitivity might inhere within relatively low levels of the cognitive hierarchy, a published series of graphic representations of the internal states of deep 2030 layers neural networks attempting to discern within essentially random data the images on which they were trained195 demonstrate a visual appeal: the original research notice received well over 1,000 comments, and was the subject of what was for a time the most frequently accessed article on The Guardians196 web site.

Errors
Some deep learning architectures display problematic behaviors,197 such as confidently classifying unrecognizable images as belonging to a familiar category of ordinary images198 and misclassifying minuscule perturbations of correctly classified images.199 Goertzel hypothesized that these behaviors are due to limitations in their internal representations and that these limitations would inhibit integration into heterogeneous multicomponent AGI architectures.197 These issues may possibly be addressed by deep learning architectures that internally form states homologous to imagegrammar200 decompositions of observed entities and events.197 Learning a grammar visual or linguistic from training data would be equivalent to restricting the system to commonsense reasoning that operates on concepts in terms of grammatical production rules and is a basic goal of both human language acquisition201 and AI.202

Cyberthreat
As deep learning moves from the lab into the world, research and experience shows that artificial neural networks are vulnerable to hacks and deception. By identifying patterns that these systems use to function, attackers can modify inputs to ANNs in such a way that the ANN finds a match that human observers would not recognize. For example, an attacker can make subtle changes to an image such that the ANN finds a match even though the image looks to a human nothing like the search target. Such a manipulation is termed an adversarial attack. In 2016 researchers used one ANN to doctor images in trial and error fashion, identify anothers focal points and thereby generate images that deceived it. The modified images looked no different to human eyes. Another group showed that printouts of doctored images then photographed successfully tricked an image classification system.203 One defense is reverse image search, in which a possible fake image is submitted to a site such as TinEye that can then find other instances of it. A refinement is to search using only parts of the image, to identify images from which that piece may have been taken.204

Another group showed that certain psychedelic spectacles could fool a facial recognition system into thinking ordinary people were celebrities, potentially allowing one person to impersonate another. In 2017 researchers added stickers to stop signs and caused an ANN to misclassify them.203

ANNs can however be further trained to detect attempts at deception, potentially leading attackers and defenders into an arms race similar to the kind that already defines the malware defense industry. ANNs have been trained to defeat ANNbased antimalware software by repeatedly attacking a defense with malware that was continually altered by a genetic algorithm until it tricked the antimalware while retaining its ability to damage the target.203

Another group demonstrated that certain sounds could make the Google Now voice command system open a particular web address that would download malware.203

In data poisoning, false data is continually smuggled into a machine learning systems training set to prevent it from achieving mastery.203

See also
Applications of artificial intelligence
Comparison of deep learning software
Compressed sensing
Echo state network
List of artificial intelligence projects
Liquid state machine
List of datasets for machine learning research
Reservoir computing
Sparse coding
References
 Bengio, Y.; Courville, A.; Vincent, P. 2013. Representation Learning: A Review and New Perspectives. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence. 35 8: 17981828. arXiv:1206.5538. doi:10.1109tpami.2013.50.
 Schmidhuber, J. 2015. Deep Learning in Neural Networks: An Overview. Neural Networks. 61: 85117. arXiv:1404.7828. doi:10.1016j.neunet.2014.09.003. PMID 25462637.
 Bengio, Yoshua; LeCun, Yann; Hinton, Geoffrey 2015. Deep Learning. Nature. 521 7553: 436444. Bibcode:2015Natur.521..436L. doi:10.1038nature14539. PMID 26017442.
 Ciresan, Dan; Meier, U.; Schmidhuber, J. June 2012. Multicolumn deep neural networks for image classification. 2012 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition: 36423649. arXiv:1202.2745. doi:10.1109cvpr.2012.6248110. ISBN 9781467312288.
 Krizhevsky, Alex; Sutskever, Ilya; Hinton, Geoffry 2012. ImageNet Classification with Deep Convolutional Neural Networks PDF. NIPS 2012: Neural Information Processing Systems, Lake Tahoe, Nevada.
 Googles AlphaGo AI wins threematch series against the worlds best Go player. TechCrunch. 25 May 2017.
 Marblestone, Adam H.; Wayne, Greg; Kording, Konrad P. 2016. Toward an Integration of Deep Learning and Neuroscience. Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience. 10: 94. doi:10.3389fncom.2016.00094. PMC 5021692. PMID 27683554.
 Olshausen, B. A. 1996. Emergence of simplecell receptive field properties by learning a sparse code for natural images. Nature. 381 6583: 607609. Bibcode:1996Natur.381..607O. doi:10.1038381607a0. PMID 8637596.
 Bengio, Yoshua; Lee, DongHyun; Bornschein, Jorg; Mesnard, Thomas; Lin, Zhouhan 20150213. Towards Biologically Plausible Deep Learning. arXiv:1502.04156 cs.LG.
 Deng, L.; Yu, D. 2014. Deep Learning: Methods and Applications PDF. Foundations and Trends in Signal Processing. 7 34: 1199. doi:10.15612000000039.
 Bengio, Yoshua 2009. Learning Deep Architectures for AI PDF. Foundations and Trends in Machine Learning. 2 1: 1127. doi:10.15612200000006.
 LeCun, Yann; Bengio, Yoshua; Hinton, Geoffrey 28 May 2015. Deep learning. Nature. 521 7553: 436444. Bibcode:2015Natur.521..436L. doi:10.1038nature14539.
 Jrgen Schmidhuber 2015. Deep Learning. Scholarpedia, 1011:32832. Online
 Hinton, G.E. 2009. Deep belief networks. Scholarpedia. 4 5: 5947. Bibcode:2009SchpJ...4.5947H. doi:10.4249scholarpedia.5947.
 Balzs Csand Csji 2001. Approximation with Artificial Neural Networks; Faculty of Sciences; Etvs Lornd University, Hungary
 Cybenko 1989. Approximations by superpositions of sigmoidal functions PDF. Mathematics of Control, Signals, and Systems. 2 4: 303314. doi:10.1007bf02551274. Archived from the original PDF on 20151010.
 Hornik, Kurt 1991. Approximation Capabilities of Multilayer Feedforward Networks. Neural Networks. 4 2: 251257. doi:10.1016089360809190009t.
 Haykin, Simon S. 1999. Neural Networks: A Comprehensive Foundation. Prentice Hall. ISBN 9780132733502.
 Hassoun, Mohamad H. 1995. Fundamentals of Artificial Neural Networks. MIT Press. p. 48. ISBN 9780262082396.
 Murphy, Kevin P. 24 August 2012. Machine Learning: A Probabilistic Perspective. MIT Press. ISBN 9780262018029.
 Patel, Ankit; Nguyen, Tan; Baraniuk, Richard 2016. A Probabilistic Framework for Deep Learning PDF. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
 Hinton, G. E.; Srivastava, N.; Krizhevsky, A.; Sutskever, I.; Salakhutdinov, R.R. 2012. Improving neural networks by preventing coadaptation of feature detectors. arXiv:1207.0580 math.LG.
 Bishop, Christopher M. 2006. Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning PDF. Springer. ISBN 9780387310732.
 Rina Dechter 1986. Learning while searching in constraintsatisfaction problems. University of California, Computer Science Department, Cognitive Systems Laboratory.Online
 Igor Aizenberg, Naum N. Aizenberg, Joos P.L. Vandewalle 2000. MultiValued and Universal Binary Neurons: Theory, Learning and Applications. Springer Science  Business Media.
 Coevolving recurrent neurons learn deep memory POMDPs. Proc. GECCO, Washington, D. C., pp. 17951802, ACM Press, New York, NY, USA, 2005.
 Ivakhnenko, A. G. 1973. Cybernetic Predicting Devices. CCM Information Corporation.
 Ivakhnenko, Alexey 1971. Polynomial theory of complex systems. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man and Cybernetics. 1 4: 364378. doi:10.1109TSMC.1971.4308320.
 Fukushima, K. 1980. Neocognitron: A selforganizing neural network model for a mechanism of pattern recognition unaffected by shift in position. Biol. Cybern. 36 4: 193202. doi:10.1007bf00344251. PMID 7370364.
 Seppo Linnainmaa 1970. The representation of the cumulative rounding error of an algorithm as a Taylor expansion of the local rounding errors. Masters Thesis in Finnish, Univ. Helsinki, 67.
 Griewank, Andreas 2012. Who Invented the Reverse Mode of Differentiation? PDF. Documenta Matematica, Extra Volume ISMP: 389400.
 Werbos, P. 1974. Beyond Regression: New Tools for Prediction and Analysis in the Behavioral Sciences. Harvard University. Retrieved 12 June 2017.
 Werbos, Paul 1982. Applications of advances in nonlinear sensitivity analysis. System modeling and optimization PDF. Springer. pp. 762770.
 LeCun et al., Backpropagation Applied to Handwritten Zip Code Recognition, Neural Computation, 1, pp. 541551, 1989.
 J. Weng, N. Ahuja and T. S. Huang, Cresceptron: a selforganizing neural network which grows adaptively, Proc. International Joint Conference on Neural Networks, Baltimore, Maryland, vol I, pp. 576581, June, 1992.
 J. Weng, N. Ahuja and T. S. Huang, Learning recognition and segmentation of 3D objects from 2D images, Proc. 4th International Conf. Computer Vision, Berlin, Germany, pp. 121128, May, 1993.
 J. Weng, N. Ahuja and T. S. Huang, Learning recognition and segmentation using the Cresceptron, International Journal of Computer Vision, vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 105139, Nov. 1997.
 de Carvalho, Andre C. L. F.; Fairhurst, Mike C.; Bisset, David 19940808. An integrated Boolean neural network for pattern classification. Pattern Recognition Letters. 15 8: 807813. doi:10.10160167865594900094.
 Hinton, Geoffrey E.; Dayan, Peter; Frey, Brendan J.; Neal, Radford 19950526. The wakesleep algorithm for unsupervised neural networks. Science. 268 5214: 11581161. Bibcode:1995Sci...268.1158H. doi:10.1126science.7761831.
 S. Hochreiter., Untersuchungen zu dynamischen neuronalen Netzen, Diploma thesis. Institut f. Informatik, Technische Univ. Munich. Advisor: J. Schmidhuber, 1991.
 Hochreiter, S.; et al. 15 January 2001. Gradient flow in recurrent nets: the difficulty of learning longterm dependencies. In Kolen, John F.; Kremer, Stefan C. A Field Guide to Dynamical Recurrent Networks. John Wiley  Sons. ISBN 9780780353695.
 Morgan, Nelson; Bourlard, Herv; Renals, Steve; Cohen, Michael; Franco, Horacio 19930801. Hybrid neural networkhidden markov model systems for continuous speech recognition. International Journal of Pattern Recognition and Artificial Intelligence. 07 4: 899916. doi:10.1142s0218001493000455. ISSN 02180014.
 Robinson, T. 1992. A realtime recurrent error propagation network word recognition system. ICASSP.
 Waibel, A.; Hanazawa, T.; Hinton, G.; Shikano, K.; Lang, K. J. March 1989. Phoneme recognition using timedelay neural networks. IEEE Transactions on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing. 37 3: 328339. doi:10.110929.21701. ISSN 00963518.
 Baker, J.; Deng, Li; Glass, Jim; Khudanpur, S.; Lee, C.H.; Morgan, N.; OShaughnessy, D. 2009. Research Developments and Directions in Speech Recognition and Understanding, Part 1. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine. 26 3: 7580. Bibcode:2009ISPM...26...75B. doi:10.1109msp.2009.932166.
 Bengio, Y. 1991. Artificial Neural Networks and their Application to SpeechSequence Recognition. McGill University Ph.D. thesis.
 Deng, L.; Hassanein, K.; Elmasry, M. 1994. Analysis of correlation structure for a neural predictive model with applications to speech recognition. Neural Networks. 7 2: 331339. doi:10.10160893608094900272.
 Heck, L.; Konig, Y.; Sonmez, M.; Weintraub, M. 2000. Robustness to Telephone Handset Distortion in Speaker Recognition by Discriminative Feature Design. Speech Communication. 31 2: 181192. doi:10.1016s0167639399000771.
 Acoustic Modeling with Deep Neural Networks Using Raw Time Signal for LVCSR PDF Download Available. ResearchGate. Retrieved 20170614.
 Hochreiter, Sepp; Schmidhuber, Jrgen 19971101. Long ShortTerm Memory. Neural Computation. 9 8: 17351780. doi:10.1162neco.1997.9.8.1735. ISSN 08997667. PMID 9377276.
 Graves, Alex; Eck, Douglas; Beringer, Nicole; Schmidhuber, Jrgen 2003. Biologically Plausible Speech Recognition with LSTM Neural Nets PDF. 1st Intl. Workshop on Biologically Inspired Approaches to Advanced Information Technology, BioADIT 2004, Lausanne, Switzerland. pp. 175184.
 Graves, Alex; Fernndez, Santiago; Gomez, Faustino 2006. Connectionist temporal classification: Labelling unsegmented sequence data with recurrent neural networks. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2006: 369376.
 Santiago Fernandez, Alex Graves, and Jrgen Schmidhuber 2007. An application of recurrent neural networks to discriminative keyword spotting. Proceedings of ICANN 2, pp. 220229.
 Sak, Haim; Senior, Andrew; Rao, Kanishka; Beaufays, Franoise; Schalkwyk, Johan September 2015. Google voice search: faster and more accurate.
 Hinton, Geoffrey E. 20071001. Learning multiple layers of representation. Trends in Cognitive Sciences. 11 10: 428434. doi:10.1016j.tics.2007.09.004. ISSN 13646613. PMID 17921042.
 Hinton, G. E.; Osindero, S.; Teh, Y. W. 2006. A Fast Learning Algorithm for Deep Belief Nets PDF. Neural Computation. 18 7: 15271554. doi:10.1162neco.2006.18.7.1527. PMID 16764513.
 Bengio, Yoshua 2012. Practical recommendations for gradientbased training of deep architectures. arXiv:1206.5533 cs.LG.
 G. E. Hinton., Learning multiple layers of representation, Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 11, pp. 428434, 2007.
 Hinton, G.; Deng, L.; Yu, D.; Dahl, G.; Mohamed, A.; Jaitly, N.; Senior, A.; Vanhoucke, V.; Nguyen, P.; Sainath, T.; Kingsbury, B. 2012. Deep Neural Networks for Acoustic Modeling in Speech Recognition  The shared views of four research groups. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine. 29 6: 8297. doi:10.1109msp.2012.2205597.
 Deng, Li; Hinton, Geoffrey; Kingsbury, Brian 1 May 2013. New types of deep neural network learning for speech recognition and related applications: An overview  via research.microsoft.com.
 Deng, L.; Li, J.; Huang, J. T.; Yao, K.; Yu, D.; Seide, F.; Seltzer, M.; Zweig, G.; He, X. May 2013. Recent advances in deep learning for speech research at Microsoft. 2013 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing: 86048608. doi:10.1109icassp.2013.6639345. ISBN 9781479903566.
 Sak, Hasim; Senior, Andrew; Beaufays, Francoise 2014. Long ShortTerm Memory recurrent neural network architectures for large scale acoustic modeling PDF.
 Li, Xiangang; Wu, Xihong 2014. Constructing Long ShortTerm Memory based Deep Recurrent Neural Networks for Large Vocabulary Speech Recognition. arXiv:1410.4281 cs.CL.
 Zen, Heiga; Sak, Hasim 2015. Unidirectional Long ShortTerm Memory Recurrent Neural Network with Recurrent Output Layer for LowLatency Speech Synthesis PDF. Google.com. ICASSP. pp. 44704474.
 Deng, L.; AbdelHamid, O.; Yu, D. 2013. A deep convolutional neural network using heterogeneous pooling for trading acoustic invariance with phonetic confusion PDF. Google.com. ICASSP.
 Sainath, T. N.; Mohamed, A. r; Kingsbury, B.; Ramabhadran, B. May 2013. Deep convolutional neural networks for LVCSR. 2013 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing: 86148618. doi:10.1109icassp.2013.6639347. ISBN 9781479903566.
 Yann LeCun 2016. Slides on Deep Learning Online
 NIPS Workshop: Deep Learning for Speech Recognition and Related Applications, Whistler, BC, Canada, Dec. 2009 Organizers: Li Deng, Geoff Hinton, D. Yu.
 Keynote talk: Recent Developments in Deep Neural Networks. ICASSP, 2013 by Geoff Hinton.
 D. Yu, L. Deng, G. Li, and F. Seide 2011. Discriminative pretraining of deep neural networks, U.S. Patent Filing.
 Deng, L.; Hinton, G.; Kingsbury, B. 2013. New types of deep neural network learning for speech recognition and related applications: An overview ICASSP PDF.
 Yu, D.; Deng, L. 2014. Automatic Speech Recognition: A Deep Learning Approach Publisher: Springer. ISBN 9781447157793.
 Deng receives prestigious IEEE Technical Achievement Award  Microsoft Research. Microsoft Research. 3 December 2015.
 Li, Deng September 2014. Keynote talk: Achievements and Challenges of Deep Learning  From Speech Analysis and Recognition To Language and Multimodal Processing. Interspeech.
 Yu, D.; Deng, L. 2010. Roles of PreTraining and FineTuning in ContextDependent DBNHMMs for RealWorld Speech Recognition. NIPS Workshop on Deep Learning and Unsupervised Feature Learning.
 Seide, F.; Li, G.; Yu, D. 2011. Conversational speech transcription using contextdependent deep neural networks. Interspeech.
 Deng, Li; Li, Jinyu; Huang, JuiTing; Yao, Kaisheng; Yu, Dong; Seide, Frank; Seltzer, Mike; Zweig, Geoff; He, Xiaodong 20130501. Recent Advances in Deep Learning for Speech Research at Microsoft. Microsoft Research.
 Nvidia CEO bets big on deep learning and VR. Venture Beat. April 5, 2016.
 From not working to neural networking. The Economist.
 Oh, K.S.; Jung, K. 2004. GPU implementation of neural networks. Pattern Recognition. 37 6: 13111314. doi:10.1016j.patcog.2004.01.013.
 Chellapilla, K., Puri, S., and Simard, P. 2006. High performance convolutional neural networks for document processing. International Workshop on Frontiers in Handwriting Recognition.
 Cirean, Dan Claudiu; Meier, Ueli; Gambardella, Luca Maria; Schmidhuber, Jrgen 20100921. Deep, Big, Simple Neural Nets for Handwritten Digit Recognition. Neural Computation. 22 12: 32073220. doi:10.1162necoa00052. ISSN 08997667.
 Raina, Rajat; Madhavan, Anand; Ng, Andrew Y. 2009. Largescale Deep Unsupervised Learning Using Graphics Processors. Proceedings of the 26th Annual International Conference on Machine Learning. ICML 09. New York, NY, USA: ACM: 873880. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.154.372. doi:10.11451553374.1553486. ISBN 9781605585161.
 Sze, Vivienne; Chen, YuHsin; Yang, TienJu; Emer, Joel 2017. Efficient Processing of Deep Neural Networks: A Tutorial and Survey. arXiv:1703.09039 cs.CV.
 Announcement of the winners of the Merck Molecular Activity Challenge.
 Multitask Neural Networks for QSAR Predictions  Data Science Association. www.datascienceassn.org. Retrieved 20170614.
 Toxicology in the 21st century Data Challenge
 NCATS Announces Tox21 Data Challenge Winners.
 Archived copy. Archived from the original on 20150228. Retrieved 20150305.
 Ciresan, D. C.; Meier, U.; Masci, J.; Gambardella, L. M.; Schmidhuber, J. 2011. Flexible, High Performance Convolutional Neural Networks for Image Classification PDF. International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence. doi:10.55919781577355168ijcai11210.
 Ciresan, Dan; Giusti, Alessandro; Gambardella, Luca M.; Schmidhuber, Juergen 2012. Pereira, F.; Burges, C. J. C.; Bottou, L.; Weinberger, K. Q., eds. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 25 PDF. Curran Associates, Inc. pp. 28432851.
 Ciresan, D.; Giusti, A.; Gambardella, L.M.; Schmidhuber, J. 2013. Mitosis Detection in Breast Cancer Histology Images using Deep Neural Networks PDF. Proceedings MICCAI.
 The Wolfram Language Image Identification Project. www.imageidentify.com. Retrieved 20170322.
 Vinyals, Oriol; Toshev, Alexander; Bengio, Samy; Erhan, Dumitru 2014. Show and Tell: A Neural Image Caption Generator. arXiv:1411.4555 cs.CV..
 Fang, Hao; Gupta, Saurabh; Iandola, Forrest; Srivastava, Rupesh; Deng, Li; Dollr, Piotr; Gao, Jianfeng; He, Xiaodong; Mitchell, Margaret; Platt, John C; Lawrence Zitnick, C; Zweig, Geoffrey 2014. From Captions to Visual Concepts and Back. arXiv:1411.4952 cs.CV..
 Kiros, Ryan; Salakhutdinov, Ruslan; Zemel, Richard S 2014. Unifying VisualSemantic Embeddings with Multimodal Neural Language Models. arXiv:1411.2539 cs.LG..
 Zhong, Shenghua; Liu, Yan; Liu, Yang 2011. Bilinear Deep Learning for Image Classification. Proceedings of the 19th ACM International Conference on Multimedia. MM 11. New York, NY, USA: ACM: 343352. doi:10.11452072298.2072344. ISBN 9781450306164.
 Why Deep Learning Is Suddenly Changing Your Life. Fortune. 2016. Retrieved 13 April 2018.
 Silver, David; Huang, Aja; Maddison, Chris J.; Guez, Arthur; Sifre, Laurent; Driessche, George van den; Schrittwieser, Julian; Antonoglou, Ioannis; Panneershelvam, Veda January 2016. Mastering the game of Go with deep neural networks and tree search. Nature. 529 7587: 484489. Bibcode:2016Natur.529..484S. doi:10.1038nature16961. ISSN 14764687. PMID 26819042.
 How Does a Neural Network Work?. deepai.org.
 Szegedy, Christian; Toshev, Alexander; Erhan, Dumitru 2013. Deep neural networks for object detection. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
 Hof, Robert D. Is Artificial Intelligence Finally Coming into Its Own?. MIT Technology Review. Retrieved 20180710.
 Gers, Felix A.; Schmidhuber, Jrgen 2001. LSTM Recurrent Networks Learn Simple Context Free and Context Sensitive Languages. IEEE Trans Neural Netw. 12 6: 13331340. doi:10.110972.963769.
 Sutskever, L.; Vinyals, O.; Le, Q. 2014. Sequence to Sequence Learning with Neural Networks PDF. Proc. NIPS.
 Jozefowicz, Rafal; Vinyals, Oriol; Schuster, Mike; Shazeer, Noam; Wu, Yonghui 2016. Exploring the Limits of Language Modeling. arXiv:1602.02410 cs.CL.
 Gillick, Dan; Brunk, Cliff; Vinyals, Oriol; Subramanya, Amarnag 2015. Multilingual Language Processing from Bytes. arXiv:1512.00103 cs.CL.
 Mikolov, T.; et al. 2010. Recurrent neural network based language model PDF. Interspeech.
 Learning Precise Timing with LSTM Recurrent Networks PDF Download Available. ResearchGate. Retrieved 20170613.
 LeCun, Y.; et al. 1998. Gradientbased learning applied to document recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE. 86 11: 22782324. doi:10.11095.726791.
 Bengio, Y.; BoulangerLewandowski, N.; Pascanu, R. May 2013. Advances in optimizing recurrent networks. 2013 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing: 86248628. arXiv:1212.0901. doi:10.1109icassp.2013.6639349. ISBN 9781479903566.
 Dahl, G.; et al. 2013. Improving DNNs for LVCSR using rectified linear units and dropout PDF. ICASSP.
 Data Augmentation  deeplearning.ai  Coursera. Coursera. Retrieved 20171130.
 Hinton, G. E. 2010. A Practical Guide to Training Restricted Boltzmann Machines. Tech. Rep. UTML TR 2010003.
 You, Yang; Bulu, Aydn; Demmel, James November 2017. Scaling deep learning on GPU and knights landing clusters. SC 17, ACM. Retrieved 5 March 2018.
 Viebke, Andr; Memeti, Suejb; Pllana, Sabri; Abraham, Ajith March 2017. CHAOS: a parallelization scheme for training convolutional neural networks on Intel Xeon Phi. The Journal of Supercomputing: 131. doi:10.1007s112270171994x.
 Ting Qin, et al. A learning algorithm of CMAC based on RLS. Neural Processing Letters 19.1 2004: 4961.
 Ting Qin, et al. Continuous CMACQRLS and its systolic array. Neural Processing Letters 22.1 2005: 116.
 TIMIT AcousticPhonetic Continuous Speech Corpus Linguistic Data Consortium, Philadelphia.
 Robinson, Tony 30 September 1991. Several Improvements to a Recurrent Error Propagation Network Phone Recognition System. Cambridge University Engineering Department Technical Report. CUEDFINFENGTR82. doi:10.13140RG.2.2.15418.90567.
 AbdelHamid, O.; et al. 2014. Convolutional Neural Networks for Speech Recognition. IEEEACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing. 22 10: 15331545. doi:10.1109taslp.2014.2339736.
 Deng, L.; Platt, J. 2014. Ensemble Deep Learning for Speech Recognition PDF. Proc. Interspeech.
 Tth, Laszl 2015. Phone Recognition with Hierarchical Convolutional Deep Maxout Networks. EURASIP Journal on Audio, Speech, and Music Processing. 2015. doi:10.1186s1363601500683.
 How Skype Used AI to Build Its Amazing New Language Translator  WIRED. www.wired.com. Retrieved 20170614.
 Hannun, Awni; Case, Carl; Casper, Jared; Catanzaro, Bryan; Diamos, Greg; Elsen, Erich; Prenger, Ryan; Satheesh, Sanjeev; Sengupta, Shubho; Coates, Adam; Ng, Andrew Y 2014. Deep Speech: Scaling up endtoend speech recognition. arXiv:1412.5567 cs.CL.
 Plenary presentation at ICASSP2016 PDF.
 MNIST handwritten digit database, Yann LeCun, Corinna Cortes and Chris Burges. yann.lecun.com.
 Cirean, Dan; Meier, Ueli; Masci, Jonathan; Schmidhuber, Jrgen August 2012. Multicolumn deep neural network for traffic sign classification. Neural Networks. Selected Papers from IJCNN 2011. 32: 333338. doi:10.1016j.neunet.2012.02.023.
 Nvidia Demos a Car Computer Trained with Deep Learning 20150106, David Talbot, MIT Technology Review
 G. W. Smith; Frederic Fol Leymarie 10 April 2017. The Machine as Artist: An Introduction. Arts. Retrieved 4 October 2017.
 Blaise Agera y Arcas 29 September 2017. Art in the Age of Machine Intelligence. Arts. Retrieved 4 October 2017.
 Bengio, Yoshua; Ducharme, Rjean; Vincent, Pascal; Janvin, Christian March 2003. A Neural Probabilistic Language Model. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 3: 11371155. ISSN 15324435.
 Goldberg, Yoav; Levy, Omar 2014. word2vec Explained: Deriving Mikolov et al.s NegativeSampling WordEmbedding Method. arXiv:1402.3722 cs.CL.
 Socher, Richard; Manning, Christopher. Deep Learning for NLP PDF. Retrieved 26 October 2014.
 Socher, Richard; Bauer, John; Manning, Christopher; Ng, Andrew 2013. Parsing With Compositional Vector Grammars PDF. Proceedings of the ACL 2013 conference.
 Socher, Richard 2013. Recursive Deep Models for Semantic Compositionality Over a Sentiment Treebank PDF.
 Shen, Yelong; He, Xiaodong; Gao, Jianfeng; Deng, Li; Mesnil, Gregoire 20141101. A Latent Semantic Model with ConvolutionalPooling Structure for Information Retrieval. Microsoft Research.
 Huang, PoSen; He, Xiaodong; Gao, Jianfeng; Deng, Li; Acero, Alex; Heck, Larry 20131001. Learning Deep Structured Semantic Models for Web Search using Clickthrough Data. Microsoft Research.
 Mesnil, G.; Dauphin, Y.; Yao, K.; Bengio, Y.; Deng, L.; HakkaniTur, D.; He, X.; Heck, L.; Tur, G.; Yu, D.; Zweig, G. 2015. Using recurrent neural networks for slot filling in spoken language understanding. IEEE Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing. 23 3: 530539. doi:10.1109taslp.2014.2383614.
 Gao, Jianfeng; He, Xiaodong; Yih, Scott Wentau; Deng, Li 20140601. Learning Continuous Phrase Representations for Translation Modeling. Microsoft Research.
 Brocardo ML, Traore I, Woungang I, Obaidat MS. Authorship verification using deep belief network systems. Int J Commun Syst. 2017. doi:10.1002dac.3259
 Deep Learning for Natural Language Processing: Theory and Practice CIKM2014 Tutorial  Microsoft Research. Microsoft Research. Retrieved 20170614.
 Turovsky, Barak November 15, 2016. Found in translation: More accurate, fluent sentences in Google Translate. The Keyword Google Blog. Google. Retrieved March 23, 2017.
 Schuster, Mike; Johnson, Melvin; Thorat, Nikhil November 22, 2016. ZeroShot Translation with Googles Multilingual Neural Machine Translation System. Google Research Blog. Google. Retrieved March 23, 2017.
 Sepp Hochreiter; Jrgen Schmidhuber 1997. Long shortterm memory. Neural Computation. 9 8: 17351780. doi:10.1162neco.1997.9.8.1735. PMID 9377276.
 Felix A. Gers; Jrgen Schmidhuber; Fred Cummins 2000. Learning to Forget: Continual Prediction with LSTM. Neural Computation. 12 10: 24512471. doi:10.1162089976600300015015.
 Wu, Yonghui; Schuster, Mike; Chen, Zhifeng; Le, Quoc V; Norouzi, Mohammad; Macherey, Wolfgang; Krikun, Maxim; Cao, Yuan; Gao, Qin; Macherey, Klaus; Klingner, Jeff; Shah, Apurva; Johnson, Melvin; Liu, Xiaobing; Kaiser, ukasz; Gouws, Stephan; Kato, Yoshikiyo; Kudo, Taku; Kazawa, Hideto; Stevens, Keith; Kurian, George; Patil, Nishant; Wang, Wei; Young, Cliff; Smith, Jason; Riesa, Jason; Rudnick, Alex; Vinyals, Oriol; Corrado, Greg; et al. 2016. Googles Neural Machine Translation System: Bridging the Gap between Human and Machine Translation. arXiv:1609.08144 cs.CL.
 An Infusion of AI Makes Google Translate More Powerful Than Ever. Cade Metz, WIRED, Date of Publication: 09.27.16. https:www.wired.com201609googleclaimsaibreakthroughmachinetranslation
 Boitet, Christian; Blanchon, Herv; Seligman, Mark; Bellynck, Valrie 2010. MT on and for the Web PDF. Retrieved December 1, 2016.
 Arrowsmith, J; Miller, P 2013. Trial watch: Phase II and phase III attrition rates 20112012. Nature Reviews Drug Discovery. 12 8: 569. doi:10.1038nrd4090. PMID 23903212.
 Verbist, B; Klambauer, G; Vervoort, L; Talloen, W; The Qstar, Consortium; Shkedy, Z; Thas, O; Bender, A; Ghlmann, H. W.; Hochreiter, S 2015. Using transcriptomics to guide lead optimization in drug discovery projects: Lessons learned from the QSTAR project. Drug Discovery Today. 20 5: 505513. doi:10.1016j.drudis.2014.12.014. PMID 25582842.
 Wallach, Izhar; Dzamba, Michael; Heifets, Abraham 20151009. AtomNet: A Deep Convolutional Neural Network for Bioactivity Prediction in Structurebased Drug Discovery. arXiv:1510.02855 cs.LG.
 Toronto startup has a faster way to discover effective medicines. The Globe and Mail. Retrieved 20151109.
 Startup Harnesses Supercomputers to Seek Cures. KQED Future of You. Retrieved 20151109.
 Toronto startup has a faster way to discover effective medicines.
 Tkachenko, Yegor April 8, 2015. Autonomous CRM Control via CLV Approximation with Deep Reinforcement Learning in Discrete and Continuous Action Space. arXiv:1504.01840 cs.LG.
 van den Oord, Aaron; Dieleman, Sander; Schrauwen, Benjamin 2013. Burges, C. J. C.; Bottou, L.; Welling, M.; Ghahramani, Z.; Weinberger, K. Q., eds. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 26 PDF. Curran Associates, Inc. pp. 26432651.
 Elkahky, Ali Mamdouh; Song, Yang; He, Xiaodong 20150501. A MultiView Deep Learning Approach for Cross Domain User Modeling in Recommendation Systems. Microsoft Research.
 Chicco, Davide; Sadowski, Peter; Baldi, Pierre 1 January 2014. Deep Autoencoder Neural Networks for Gene Ontology Annotation Predictions. Proceedings of the 5th ACM Conference on Bioinformatics, Computational Biology, and Health Informatics  BCB 14. ACM: 533540. doi:10.11452649387.2649442. ISBN 9781450328944  via ACM Digital Library.
 Sathyanarayana, Aarti 20160101. Sleep Quality Prediction From Wearable Data Using Deep Learning. JMIR mHealth and uHealth. 4 4: e125. doi:10.2196mhealth.6562. PMC 5116102. PMID 27815231.
 Choi, Edward; Schuetz, Andy; Stewart, Walter F.; Sun, Jimeng 20160813. Using recurrent neural network models for early detection of heart failure onset. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association. 24 2: 361370. doi:10.1093jamiaocw112. ISSN 10675027. PMC 5391725. PMID 27521897.
 Startups, Requests for 20160812. Deep Learning in Healthcare: Challenges and Opportunities. Medium. Retrieved 20180410.
 Using Deep Learning Neural Networks To Find Best Performing Audience Segments PDF. IJSTR. 5 4.
 De, Shaunak; Maity, Abhishek; Goel, Vritti; Shitole, Sanjay; Bhattacharya, Avik 2017. Predicting the popularity of instagram posts for a lifestyle magazine using deep learning. 2nd IEEE Conference on Communication Systems, Computing and IT Applications: 174177. doi:10.1109CSCITA.2017.8066548. ISBN 9781509043811.
 Schmidt, Uwe; Roth, Stefan. Shrinkage Fields for Effective Image Restoration PDF. Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition CVPR, 2014 IEEE Conference on.
 Czech, Tomasz. Deep learning: the next frontier for money laundering detection. Global Banking and Finance Review.
 Army researchers develop new algorithms to train robots. EurekAlert!. Retrieved 20180829.
 Utgoff, P. E.; Stracuzzi, D. J. 2002. Manylayered learning. Neural Computation. 14 10: 24972529. doi:10.116208997660260293319.
 Elman, Jeffrey L. 1998. Rethinking Innateness: A Connectionist Perspective on Development. MIT Press. ISBN 9780262550307.
 Shrager, J.; Johnson, MH 1996. Dynamic plasticity influences the emergence of function in a simple cortical array. Neural Networks. 9 7: 11191129. doi:10.10160893608096000330. PMID 12662587.
 Quartz, SR; Sejnowski, TJ 1997. The neural basis of cognitive development: A constructivist manifesto. Behavioral and Brain Sciences. 20 4: 537556. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.41.7854. doi:10.1017s0140525x97001581.
 S. Blakeslee., In brains early growth, timetable may be critical, The New York Times, Science Section, pp. B5B6, 1995.
 Mazzoni, P.; Andersen, R. A.; Jordan, M. I. 19910515. A more biologically plausible learning rule for neural networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 88 10: 44334437. Bibcode:1991PNAS...88.4433M. doi:10.1073pnas.88.10.4433. ISSN 00278424. PMC 51674. PMID 1903542.
 OReilly, Randall C. 19960701. Biologically Plausible ErrorDriven Learning Using Local Activation Differences: The Generalized Recirculation Algorithm. Neural Computation. 8 5: 895938. doi:10.1162neco.1996.8.5.895. ISSN 08997667.
 Testolin, Alberto; Zorzi, Marco 2016. Probabilistic Models and Generative Neural Networks: Towards an Unified Framework for Modeling Normal and Impaired Neurocognitive Functions. Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience. 10. doi:10.3389fncom.2016.00073. ISSN 16625188.
 Testolin, Alberto; Stoianov, Ivilin; Zorzi, Marco September 2017. Letter perception emerges from unsupervised deep learning and recycling of natural image features. Nature Human Behaviour. 1 9: 657664. doi:10.1038s4156201701862. ISSN 23973374.
 Buesing, Lars; Bill, Johannes; Nessler, Bernhard; Maass, Wolfgang 20111103. Neural Dynamics as Sampling: A Model for Stochastic Computation in Recurrent Networks of Spiking Neurons. PLOS Computational Biology. 7 11: e1002211. Bibcode:2011PLSCB...7E2211B. doi:10.1371journal.pcbi.1002211. ISSN 15537358. PMID 22096452.
 Morel, Danielle; Singh, Chandan; Levy, William B. 20180125. Linearization of excitatory synaptic integration at no extra cost. Journal of Computational Neuroscience. 44 2: 116. doi:10.1007s1082701706735. ISSN 09295313.
 Cash, S.; Yuste, R. February 1999. Linear summation of excitatory inputs by CA1 pyramidal neurons. Neuron. 22 2: 383394. doi:10.1016s0896627300810983. ISSN 08966273. PMID 10069343.
 Olshausen, B; Field, D 20040801. Sparse coding of sensory inputs. Current Opinion in Neurobiology. 14 4: 481487. doi:10.1016j.conb.2004.07.007. ISSN 09594388.
 Yamins, Daniel L K; DiCarlo, James J March 2016. Using goaldriven deep learning models to understand sensory cortex. Nature Neuroscience. 19 3: 356365. doi:10.1038nn.4244. ISSN 15461726.
 Zorzi, Marco; Testolin, Alberto 20180219. An emergentist perspective on the origin of number sense. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B. 373 1740: 20170043. doi:10.1098rstb.2017.0043. ISSN 09628436. PMC 5784047. PMID 29292348.
 Gl, Umut; van Gerven, Marcel A. J. 20150708. Deep Neural Networks Reveal a Gradient in the Complexity of Neural Representations across the Ventral Stream. Journal of Neuroscience. 35 27: 1000510014. doi:10.1523jneurosci.502314.2015.
 Metz, C. 12 December 2013. Facebooks Deep Learning Guru Reveals the Future of AI. Wired.
 Google AI algorithm masters ancient game of Go. Nature News  Comment. Retrieved 20160130.
 Silver, David; Huang, Aja; Maddison, Chris J.; Guez, Arthur; Sifre, Laurent; Driessche, George van den; Schrittwieser, Julian; Antonoglou, Ioannis; Panneershelvam, Veda; Lanctot, Marc; Dieleman, Sander; Grewe, Dominik; Nham, John; Kalchbrenner, Nal; Sutskever, Ilya; Lillicrap, Timothy; Leach, Madeleine; Kavukcuoglu, Koray; Graepel, Thore; Hassabis, Demis 28 January 2016. Mastering the game of Go with deep neural networks and tree search. Nature. 529 7587: 484489. Bibcode:2016Natur.529..484S. doi:10.1038nature16961. ISSN 00280836. PMID 26819042. Retrieved 11 December 2017.closed access publication  behind paywall
 A Google DeepMind Algorithm Uses Deep Learning and More to Master the Game of Go  MIT Technology Review. MIT Technology Review. Retrieved 20160130.
 Blippar Demonstrates New RealTime Augmented Reality App. TechCrunch.
 TAMER: Training an Agent Manually via Evaluative Reinforcement  IEEE Conference Publication. ieeexplore.ieee.org. Retrieved 20180829.
 Talk to the Algorithms: AI Becomes a Faster Learner. governmentciomedia.com. Retrieved 20180829.
 Marcus, Gary 20180114. In defense of skepticism about deep learning. Gary Marcus. Retrieved 20181011.
 Knight, Will 20170314. DARPA is funding projects that will try to open up AIs black boxes. MIT Technology Review. Retrieved 20171102.
 Marcus, Gary November 25, 2012. Is Deep Learning a Revolution in Artificial Intelligence?. The New Yorker. Retrieved 20170614.
 Smith, G. W. March 27, 2015. Art and Artificial Intelligence. ArtEnt. Archived from the original on June 25, 2017. Retrieved March 27, 2015.
 Mellars, Paul February 1, 2005. The Impossible Coincidence: A SingleSpecies Model for the Origins of Modern Human Behavior in Europe PDF. Evolutionary Anthropology: Issues, News, and Reviews. Retrieved April 5, 2017.
 Alexander Mordvintsev; Christopher Olah; Mike Tyka June 17, 2015. Inceptionism: Going Deeper into Neural Networks. Google Research Blog. Retrieved June 20, 2015.
 Alex Hern June 18, 2015. Yes, androids do dream of electric sheep. The Guardian. Retrieved June 20, 2015.
 Goertzel, Ben 2015. Are there Deep Reasons Underlying the Pathologies of Todays Deep Learning Algorithms? PDF.
 Nguyen, Anh; Yosinski, Jason; Clune, Jeff 2014. Deep Neural Networks are Easily Fooled: High Confidence Predictions for Unrecognizable Images. arXiv:1412.1897 cs.CV.
 Szegedy, Christian; Zaremba, Wojciech; Sutskever, Ilya; Bruna, Joan; Erhan, Dumitru; Goodfellow, Ian; Fergus, Rob 2013. Intriguing properties of neural networks. arXiv:1312.6199 cs.CV.
 Zhu, S.C.; Mumford, D. 2006. A stochastic grammar of images. Found. Trends Comput. Graph. Vis. 2 4: 259362. doi:10.15610600000018.
 Miller, G. A., and N. Chomsky. Pattern conception. Paper for Conference on pattern detection, University of Michigan. 1957.
 Eisner, Jason. Deep Learning of Recursive Structure: Grammar Induction.
 AI Is Easy to FoolWhy That Needs to Change. Singularity Hub. 20171010. Retrieved 20171011.
 Gibney, Elizabeth 2017. The scientist who spots fake videos. Nature. doi:10.1038nature.2017.22784.
External links
Categories: Deep learningArtificial neural networks

Big data
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
  Redirected from Big Data
Jump to navigationJump to search
This article is about large collections of data. For the band, see Big Data band. For buying and selling of personal and consumer data, see Surveillance capitalism.

Growth of and digitization of global informationstorage capacity1
Big data is a term used to refer to data sets that are too large or complex for traditional dataprocessing application software to adequately deal with. Data with many cases rows offer greater statistical power, while data with higher complexity more attributes or columns may lead to a higher false discovery rate.2 Big data challenges include capturing data, data storage, data analysis, search, sharing, transfer, visualization, querying, updating, information privacy and data source. Big data was originally associated with three key concepts: volume, variety, and velocity.3 Other concepts later attributed with big data are veracity i.e., how much noise is in the data 4 and value.5

Current usage of the term big data tends to refer to the use of predictive analytics, user behavior analytics, or certain other advanced data analytics methods that extract value from data, and seldom to a particular size of data set. There is little doubt that the quantities of data now available are indeed large, but thats not the most relevant characteristic of this new data ecosystem.6 Analysis of data sets can find new correlations to spot business trends, prevent diseases, combat crime and so on.7 Scientists, business executives, practitioners of medicine, advertising and governments alike regularly meet difficulties with large datasets in areas including Internet search, fintech, urban informatics, and business informatics. Scientists encounter limitations in eScience work, including meteorology, genomics,8 connectomics, complex physics simulations, biology and environmental research.9

Data sets grow rapidly in part because they are increasingly gathered by cheap and numerous information sensing Internet of things devices such as mobile devices, aerial remote sensing, software logs, cameras, microphones, radiofrequency identification RFID readers and wireless sensor networks.1011 The worlds technological percapita capacity to store information has roughly doubled every 40 months since the 1980s;12 as of 2012, every day 2.5 exabytes 2.51018 of data are generated.13 Based on an IDC report prediction, the global data volume will grow exponentially from 4.4 zettabytes to 44 zettabytes between 2013 and 2020.14 By 2025, IDC predicts there will be 163 zettabytes of data.15 One question for large enterprises is determining who should own bigdata initiatives that affect the entire organization.16

Relational database management systems, desktop statisticsclarification needed and software packages used to visualize data often have difficulty handling big data. The work may require massively parallel software running on tens, hundreds, or even thousands of servers.17 What qualifies as being big data varies depending on the capabilities of the users and their tools, and expanding capabilities make big data a moving target. For some organizations, facing hundreds of gigabytes of data for the first time may trigger a need to reconsider data management options. For others, it may take tens or hundreds of terabytes before data size becomes a significant consideration.18


Contents
1Definition
2Characteristics
3Architecture
4Technologies
5Applications
5.1Government
5.2International development
5.3Manufacturing
5.4Healthcare
5.5Education
5.6Media
5.7Insurance
5.8Internet of Things IoT
5.9Information Technology
6Case studies
6.1Government
6.1.1China
6.1.2India
6.1.3Israel
6.1.4United Kingdom
6.1.5United States of America
6.2Retail
6.3Science
6.4Sports
6.5Technology
7Research activities
7.1Sampling big data
8Critique
8.1Critiques of the big data paradigm
8.2Critiques of the V Model
8.3Critiques of novelty
8.4Critiques of big data execution
9See also
10References
11Further reading
12External links
Definition

Visualization created by IBM of daily Wikipedia edits. At multiple terabytes in size, the text and images of Wikipedia are an example of big data.
The term has been in use since the 1990s, with some giving credit to John Mashey for popularizing the term.192021 Big data usually includes data sets with sizes beyond the ability of commonly used software tools to capture, curate, manage, and process data within a tolerable elapsed time.22 Big data philosophy encompasses unstructured, semistructured and structured data, however the main focus is on unstructured data.23 Big data size is a constantly moving target, as of 2012 ranging from a few dozen terabytes to many exabytes of data.24 Big data requires a set of techniques and technologies with new forms of integration to reveal insights from datasets that are diverse, complex, and of a massive scale.25

A 2016 definition states that Big data represents the information assets characterized by such a high volume, velocity and variety to require specific technology and analytical methods for its transformation into value.26 Additionally, a new V, veracity, is added by some organizations to describe it,27 revisionism challenged by some industry authorities.28 The three Vs volume, variety and velocity have been further expanded to other complementary characteristics of big data:2930

Machine learning: big data often doesnt ask why and simply detects patterns31
Digital footprint: big data is often a costfree byproduct of digital interaction3032
A 2018 definition states Big data is where parallel computing tools are needed to handle data, and notes, This represents a distinct and clearly defined change in the computer science used, via parallel programming theories, and losses of some of the guarantees and capabilities made by Codds relational model. 33

The growing maturity of the concept more starkly delineates the difference between big data and Business Intelligence:34

Business Intelligence uses descriptive statistics with data with high information density to measure things, detect trends, etc.
Big data uses inductive statistics and concepts from nonlinear system identification35 to infer laws regressions, nonlinear relationships, and causal effects from large sets of data with low information density36 to reveal relationships and dependencies, or to perform predictions of outcomes and behaviors.3537
Characteristics

Shows the growth of big datas primary characteristics of volume, velocity, and variety.
Big data can be described by the following characteristics:2930

Volume
The quantity of generated and stored data. The size of the data determines the value and potential insight, and whether it can be considered big data or not.
Variety
The type and nature of the data. This helps people who analyze it to effectively use the resulting insight. Big data draws from text, images, audio, video; plus it completes missing pieces through data fusion.
Velocity
In this context, the speed at which the data is generated and processed to meet the demands and challenges that lie in the path of growth and development. Big data is often available in realtime.
Veracity
The data quality of captured data can vary greatly, affecting the accurate analysis.38

Data must be processed with advanced tools analytics and algorithms to reveal meaningful information. For example, to manage a factory one must consider both visible and invisible issues with various components. Information generation algorithms must detect and address invisible issues such as machine degradation, component wear, etc. on the factory floor.3940

Architecture
Big data repositories have existed in many forms, often built by corporations with a special need. Commercial vendors historically offered parallel database management systems for big data beginning in the 1990s. For many years, WinterCorp published a largest database report.41

Teradata Corporation in 1984 marketed the parallel processing DBC 1012 system. Teradata systems were the first to store and analyze 1 terabyte of data in 1992. Hard disk drives were 2.5 GB in 1991 so the definition of big data continuously evolves according to Kryders Law. Teradata installed the first petabyte class RDBMS based system in 2007. As of 2017, there are a few dozen petabyte class Teradata relational databases installed, the largest of which exceeds 50 PB. Systems up until 2008 were 100 structured relational data. Since then, Teradata has added unstructured data types including XML, JSON, and Avro.

In 2000, Seisint Inc. now LexisNexis Group developed a Cbased distributed filesharing framework for data storage and query. The system stores and distributes structured, semistructured, and unstructured data across multiple servers. Users can build queries in a C dialect called ECL. ECL uses an apply schema on read method to infer the structure of stored data when it is queried, instead of when it is stored. In 2004, LexisNexis acquired Seisint Inc.42 and in 2008 acquired ChoicePoint, Inc.43 and their highspeed parallel processing platform. The two platforms were merged into HPCC or HighPerformance Computing Cluster Systems and in 2011, HPCC was opensourced under the Apache v2.0 License. Quantcast File System was available about the same time.44

CERN and other physics experiments have collected big data sets for many decades, usually analyzed via high performance computing supercomputers rather than the commodity mapreduce architectures usually meant by the current big data movement.

In 2004, Google published a paper on a process called MapReduce that uses a similar architecture. The MapReduce concept provides a parallel processing model, and an associated implementation was released to process huge amounts of data. With MapReduce, queries are split and distributed across parallel nodes and processed in parallel the Map step. The results are then gathered and delivered the Reduce step. The framework was very successful,45 so others wanted to replicate the algorithm. Therefore, an implementation of the MapReduce framework was adopted by an Apache opensource project named Hadoop.46 Apache Spark was developed in 2012 in response to limitations in the MapReduce paradigm, as it adds the ability to set up many operations not just map followed by reduce.

MIKE2.0 is an open approach to information management that acknowledges the need for revisions due to big data implications identified in an article titled Big Data Solution Offering.47 The methodology addresses handling big data in terms of useful permutations of data sources, complexity in interrelationships, and difficulty in deleting or modifying individual records.48

2012 studies showed that a multiplelayer architecture is one option to address the issues that big data presents. A distributed parallel architecture distributes data across multiple servers; these parallel execution environments can dramatically improve data processing speeds. This type of architecture inserts data into a parallel DBMS, which implements the use of MapReduce and Hadoop frameworks. This type of framework looks to make the processing power transparent to the end user by using a frontend application server.49

The data lake allows an organization to shift its focus from centralized control to a shared model to respond to the changing dynamics of information management. This enables quick segregation of data into the data lake, thereby reducing the overhead time.5051

Big data analytics for manufacturing applications is marketed as a 5C architecture connection, conversion, cyber, cognition, and configuration.52 Factory work and Cyberphysical systems may have an extended 6C system:

Connection sensor and networks
Cloud computing and data on demand5354
Cyber model and memory
Contentcontext meaning and correlation
Community sharing and collaboration
Customization personalization and value
Technologies
A 2011 McKinsey Global Institute report characterizes the main components and ecosystem of big data as follows:55

Techniques for analyzing data, such as AB testing, machine learning and natural language processing
Big data technologies, like business intelligence, cloud computing and databases
Visualization, such as charts, graphs and other displays of the data
Multidimensional big data can also be represented as data cubes or, mathematically, tensors. Array Database Systems have set out to provide storage and highlevel query support on this data type. Additional technologies being applied to big data include efficient tensorbased computation,56 such as multilinear subspace learning.,57 massively parallelprocessing MPP databases, searchbased applications, data mining,58 distributed file systems, distributed databases, cloud and HPCbased infrastructure applications, storage and computing resources59 and the Internet.citation needed Although, many approaches and technologies have been developed, it still remains difficult to carry out machine learning with big data.60

Some MPP relational databases have the ability to store and manage petabytes of data. Implicit is the ability to load, monitor, back up, and optimize the use of the large data tables in the RDBMS.61

DARPAs Topological Data Analysis program seeks the fundamental structure of massive data sets and in 2008 the technology went public with the launch of a company called Ayasdi.62

The practitioners of big data analytics processes are generally hostile to slower shared storage,63 preferring directattached storage DAS in its various forms from solid state drive SSD to high capacity SATA disk buried inside parallel processing nodes. The perception of shared storage architecturesStorage area network SAN and Networkattached storage NAS is that they are relatively slow, complex, and expensive. These qualities are not consistent with big data analytics systems that thrive on system performance, commodity infrastructure, and low cost.

Real or nearreal time information delivery is one of the defining characteristics of big data analytics. Latency is therefore avoided whenever and wherever possible. Data in memory is gooddata on spinning disk at the other end of a FC SAN connection is not. The cost of a SAN at the scale needed for analytics applications is very much higher than other storage techniques.

There are advantages as well as disadvantages to shared storage in big data analytics, but big data analytics practitioners as of 2011 did not favour it.64

Applications

Bus wrapped with SAP Big data parked outside IDF13.
Big data has increased the demand of information management specialists so much so that Software AG, Oracle Corporation, IBM, Microsoft, SAP, EMC, HP and Dell have spent more than 15 billion on software firms specializing in data management and analytics. In 2010, this industry was worth more than 100 billion and was growing at almost 10 percent a year: about twice as fast as the software business as a whole.7

Developed economies increasingly use dataintensive technologies. There are 4.6 billion mobilephone subscriptions worldwide, and between 1 billion and 2 billion people accessing the internet.7 Between 1990 and 2005, more than 1 billion people worldwide entered the middle class, which means more people became more literate, which in turn led to information growth. The worlds effective capacity to exchange information through telecommunication networks was 281 petabytes in 1986, 471 petabytes in 1993, 2.2 exabytes in 2000, 65 exabytes in 200712 and predictions put the amount of internet traffic at 667 exabytes annually by 2014.7 According to one estimate, onethird of the globally stored information is in the form of alphanumeric text and still image data,65 which is the format most useful for most big data applications. This also shows the potential of yet unused data i.e. in the form of video and audio content.

While many vendors offer offtheshelf solutions for big data, experts recommend the development of inhouse solutions customtailored to solve the companys problem at hand if the company has sufficient technical capabilities.66

Government
The use and adoption of big data within governmental processes allows efficiencies in terms of cost, productivity, and innovation,67 but does not come without its flaws. Data analysis often requires multiple parts of government central and local to work in collaboration and create new and innovative processes to deliver the desired outcome.

CRVS Civil Registration and Vital Statistics collects all certificates status from birth to death. CRVS is a source of big data for governments.

International development
Research on the effective usage of information and communication technologies for development also known as ICT4D suggests that big data technology can make important contributions but also present unique challenges to International development.6869 Advancements in big data analysis offer costeffective opportunities to improve decisionmaking in critical development areas such as health care, employment, economic productivity, crime, security, and natural disaster and resource management.707172 Additionally, usergenerated data offers new opportunities to give the unheard a voice.73 However, longstanding challenges for developing regions such as inadequate technological infrastructure and economic and human resource scarcity exacerbate existing concerns with big data such as privacy, imperfect methodology, and interoperability issues.70

Manufacturing
Based on TCS 2013 Global Trend Study, improvements in supply planning and product quality provide the greatest benefit of big data for manufacturing. Big data provides an infrastructure for transparency in manufacturing industry, which is the ability to unravel uncertainties such as inconsistent component performance and availability. Predictive manufacturing as an applicable approach toward nearzero downtime and transparency requires vast amount of data and advanced prediction tools for a systematic process of data into useful information.74 A conceptual framework of predictive manufacturing begins with data acquisition where different type of sensory data is available to acquire such as acoustics, vibration, pressure, current, voltage and controller data. Vast amount of sensory data in addition to historical data construct the big data in manufacturing. The generated big data acts as the input into predictive tools and preventive strategies such as Prognostics and Health Management PHM.7576

Healthcare
Big data analytics has helped healthcare improve by providing personalized medicine and prescriptive analytics, clinical risk intervention and predictive analytics, waste and care variability reduction, automated external and internal reporting of patient data, standardized medical terms and patient registries and fragmented point solutions.77 Some areas of improvement are more aspirational than actually implemented. The level of data generated within healthcare systems is not trivial. With the added adoption of mHealth, eHealth and wearable technologies the volume of data will continue to increase. This includes electronic health record data, imaging data, patient generated data, sensor data, and other forms of difficult to process data. There is now an even greater need for such environments to pay greater attention to data and information quality.78 Big data very often means dirty data and the fraction of data inaccuracies increases with data volume growth. Human inspection at the big data scale is impossible and there is a desperate need in health service for intelligent tools for accuracy and believability control and handling of information missed.79 While extensive information in healthcare is now electronic, it fits under the big data umbrella as most is unstructured and difficult to use.80 The use of big data in healthcare has raised significant ethical challenges ranging from risks for individual rights, privacy and autonomy, to transparency and trust.81

Education
A McKinsey Global Institute study found a shortage of 1.5 million highly trained data professionals and managers55 and a number of universities82 including University of Tennessee and UC Berkeley, have created masters programs to meet this demand. Private bootcamps have also developed programs to meet that demand, including free programs like The Data Incubator or paid programs like General Assembly.83 In the specific field of marketing, one of the problems stressed by Wedel and Kannan 84 is that marketing has several subdomains e.g., advertising, promotions, product development, branding that all use different types of data. Because onesizefitsall analytical solutions are not desirable, business schools should prepare marketing managers to have wide knowledge on all the different techniques used in these subdomains to get a big picture and work effectively with analysts.

Media
To understand how the media utilizes big data, it is first necessary to provide some context into the mechanism used for media process. It has been suggested by Nick Couldry and Joseph Turow that practitioners in Media and Advertising approach big data as many actionable points of information about millions of individuals. The industry appears to be moving away from the traditional approach of using specific media environments such as newspapers, magazines, or television shows and instead taps into consumers with technologies that reach targeted people at optimal times in optimal locations. The ultimate aim is to serve or convey, a message or content that is statistically speaking in line with the consumers mindset. For example, publishing environments are increasingly tailoring messages advertisements and content articles to appeal to consumers that have been exclusively gleaned through various datamining activities.85

Targeting of consumers for advertising by marketers 86
Data capture
Data journalism: publishers and journalists use big data tools to provide unique and innovative insights and infographics.
Channel 4, the British publicservice television broadcaster, is a leader in the field of big data and data analysis.87

Insurance
Health insurance providers are collecting data on social determinants of health such as food and TV consumption, marital status, clothing size and purchasing habits, from which they make predictions on health costs, in order to spot health issues in their clients. It is controversial whether these predictions are currently being used for pricing.88

Internet of Things IoT
Main article: Internet of Things
Further information: Edge computing
Big data and the IoT work in conjunction. Data extracted from IoT devices provides a mapping of device interconnectivity. Such mappings have been used by the media industry, companies and governments to more accurately target their audience and increase media efficiency. IoT is also increasingly adopted as a means of gathering sensory data, and this sensory data has been used in medical,89 manufacturing 90 and transportation 91 contexts.

Kevin Ashton, digital innovation expert who is credited with coining the term,92 defines the Internet of Things in this quote: If we had computers that knew everything there was to know about thingsusing data they gathered without any help from uswe would be able to track and count everything, and greatly reduce waste, loss and cost. We would know when things needed replacing, repairing or recalling, and whether they were fresh or past their best.

Information Technology
Especially since 2015, big data has come to prominence within Business Operations as a tool to help employees work more efficiently and streamline the collection and distribution of Information Technology IT. The use of big data to resolve IT and data collection issues within an enterprise is called IT Operations Analytics ITOA.93 By applying big data principles into the concepts of machine intelligence and deep computing, IT departments can predict potential issues and move to provide solutions before the problems even happen.93 In this time, ITOA businesses were also beginning to play a major role in systems management by offering platforms that brought individual data silos together and generated insights from the whole of the system rather than from isolated pockets of data.

Case studies
Government
China
The Integrated Joint Operations Platform IJOP,  is used by the government to monitor the population, particularly Uyghurs.94 Biometrics, including DNA samples, are gathered though a program of free physicals.95
India
Big data analysis was tried out for the BJP to win the Indian General Election 2014.96
The Indian government utilizes numerous techniques to ascertain how the Indian electorate is responding to government action, as well as ideas for policy augmentation.
Israel
A big data application was designed by Agro Web Lab to aid irrigation regulation.97
Personalized diabetic treatments can be created through GlucoMes big data solution.98
United Kingdom
Examples of uses of big data in public services:

Data on prescription drugs: by connecting origin, location and the time of each prescription, a research unit was able to exemplify the considerable delay between the release of any given drug, and a UKwide adaptation of the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence guidelines. This suggests that new or most uptodate drugs take some time to filter through to the general patient.99
Joining up data: a local authority blended data about services, such as road gritting rotas, with services for people at risk, such as meals on wheels. The connection of data allowed the local authority to avoid any weatherrelated delay.100
United States of America
In 2012, the Obama administration announced the Big Data Research and Development Initiative, to explore how big data could be used to address important problems faced by the government.101 The initiative is composed of 84 different big data programs spread across six departments.102
Big data analysis played a large role in Barack Obamas successful 2012 reelection campaign.103
The United States Federal Government owns five of the ten most powerful supercomputers in the world.104105
The Utah Data Center has been constructed by the United States National Security Agency. When finished, the facility will be able to handle a large amount of information collected by the NSA over the Internet. The exact amount of storage space is unknown, but more recent sources claim it will be on the order of a few exabytes.106107108 This has posed security concerns regarding the anonymity of the data collected.109
Retail
Walmart handles more than 1 million customer transactions every hour, which are imported into databases estimated to contain more than 2.5 petabytes 2560 terabytes of datathe equivalent of 167 times the information contained in all the books in the US Library of Congress.7
Windermere Real Estate uses location information from nearly 100 million drivers to help new home buyers determine their typical drive times to and from work throughout various times of the day.110
FICO Card Detection System protects accounts worldwide.111
Science
The Large Hadron Collider experiments represent about 150 million sensors delivering data 40 million times per second. There are nearly 600 million collisions per second. After filtering and refraining from recording more than 99.99995112 of these streams, there are 100 collisions of interest per second.113114115
As a result, only working with less than 0.001 of the sensor stream data, the data flow from all four LHC experiments represents 25 petabytes annual rate before replication as of 2012. This becomes nearly 200 petabytes after replication.
If all sensor data were recorded in LHC, the data flow would be extremely hard to work with. The data flow would exceed 150 million petabytes annual rate, or nearly 500 exabytes per day, before replication. To put the number in perspective, this is equivalent to 500 quintillion 51020 bytes per day, almost 200 times more than all the other sources combined in the world.
The Square Kilometre Array is a radio telescope built of thousands of antennas. It is expected to be operational by 2024. Collectively, these antennas are expected to gather 14 exabytes and store one petabyte per day.116117 It is considered one of the most ambitious scientific projects ever undertaken.118
When the Sloan Digital Sky Survey SDSS began to collect astronomical data in 2000, it amassed more in its first few weeks than all data collected in the history of astronomy previously. Continuing at a rate of about 200 GB per night, SDSS has amassed more than 140 terabytes of information.7 When the Large Synoptic Survey Telescope, successor to SDSS, comes online in 2020, its designers expect it to acquire that amount of data every five days.7
Decoding the human genome originally took 10 years to process; now it can be achieved in less than a day. The DNA sequencers have divided the sequencing cost by 10,000 in the last ten years, which is 100 times cheaper than the reduction in cost predicted by Moores Law.119
The NASA Center for Climate Simulation NCCS stores 32 petabytes of climate observations and simulations on the Discover supercomputing cluster.120121
Googles DNAStack compiles and organizes DNA samples of genetic data from around the world to identify diseases and other medical defects. These fast and exact calculations eliminate any friction points, or human errors that could be made by one of the numerous science and biology experts working with the DNA. DNAStack, a part of Google Genomics, allows scientists to use the vast sample of resources from Googles search server to scale social experiments that would usually take years, instantly.122123
23andmes DNA database contains genetic information of over 1,000,000 people worldwide.124 The company explores selling the anonymous aggregated genetic data to other researchers and pharmaceutical companies for research purposes if patients give their consent.125126127128129 Ahmad Hariri, professor of psychology and neuroscience at Duke University who has been using 23andMe in his research since 2009 states that the most important aspect of the companys new service is that it makes genetic research accessible and relatively cheap for scientists.125 A study that identified 15 genome sites linked to depression in 23andMes database lead to a surge in demands to access the repository with 23andMe fielding nearly 20 requests to access the depression data in the two weeks after publication of the paper.130
Computational Fluid Dynamics CFD and hydrodynamic turbulence research generate massive datasets. The Johns Hopkins Turbulence Databases JHTDB contains over 350 terabytes of spatiotemporal fields from Direct Numerical simulations of various turbulent flows. Such data have been difficult to share using traditional methods such as downloading flat simulation output files. The data within JHTDB can be accessed using virtual sensors with various access modes ranging from direct webbrowser queries, access through Matlab, Python, Fortran and C programs executing on clients platforms, to cut out services to download raw data. The data have been used in over 150 scientific publications.
Sports
Big data can be used to improve training and understanding competitors, using sport sensors. It is also possible to predict winners in a match using big data analytics.131 Future performance of players could be predicted as well. Thus, players value and salary is determined by data collected throughout the season.132

The movie MoneyBall demonstrates how big data could be used to scout players and also identify undervalued players.133

In Formula One races, race cars with hundreds of sensors generate terabytes of data. These sensors collect data points from tire pressure to fuel burn efficiency.134 Based on the data, engineers and data analysts decide whether adjustments should be made in order to win a race. Besides, using big data, race teams try to predict the time they will finish the race beforehand, based on simulations using data collected over the season.135

Technology
eBay.com uses two data warehouses at 7.5 petabytes and 40PB as well as a 40PB Hadoop cluster for search, consumer recommendations, and merchandising.136
Amazon.com handles millions of backend operations every day, as well as queries from more than half a million thirdparty sellers. The core technology that keeps Amazon running is Linuxbased and as of 2005 they had the worlds three largest Linux databases, with capacities of 7.8 TB, 18.5 TB, and 24.7 TB.137
Facebook handles 50 billion photos from its user base.138 As of June 2017, Facebook reached 2 billion monthly active users.139
Google was handling roughly 100 billion searches per month as of August 2012.140
Research activities
Encrypted search and cluster formation in big data were demonstrated in March 2014 at the American Society of Engineering Education. Gautam Siwach engaged at Tackling the challenges of Big Data by MIT Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory and Dr. Amir Esmailpour at UNH Research Group investigated the key features of big data as the formation of clusters and their interconnections. They focused on the security of big data and the orientation of the term towards the presence of different type of data in an encrypted form at cloud interface by providing the raw definitions and real time examples within the technology. Moreover, they proposed an approach for identifying the encoding technique to advance towards an expedited search over encrypted text leading to the security enhancements in big data.141

In March 2012, The White House announced a national Big Data Initiative that consisted of six Federal departments and agencies committing more than 200 million to big data research projects.142

The initiative included a National Science Foundation Expeditions in Computing grant of 10 million over 5 years to the AMPLab143 at the University of California, Berkeley.144 The AMPLab also received funds from DARPA, and over a dozen industrial sponsors and uses big data to attack a wide range of problems from predicting traffic congestion145 to fighting cancer.146

The White House Big Data Initiative also included a commitment by the Department of Energy to provide 25 million in funding over 5 years to establish the Scalable Data Management, Analysis and Visualization SDAV Institute,147 led by the Energy Departments Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. The SDAV Institute aims to bring together the expertise of six national laboratories and seven universities to develop new tools to help scientists manage and visualize data on the Departments supercomputers.

The U.S. state of Massachusetts announced the Massachusetts Big Data Initiative in May 2012, which provides funding from the state government and private companies to a variety of research institutions.148 The Massachusetts Institute of Technology hosts the Intel Science and Technology Center for Big Data in the MIT Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, combining government, corporate, and institutional funding and research efforts.149

The European Commission is funding the 2yearlong Big Data Public Private Forum through their Seventh Framework Program to engage companies, academics and other stakeholders in discussing big data issues. The project aims to define a strategy in terms of research and innovation to guide supporting actions from the European Commission in the successful implementation of the big data economy. Outcomes of this project will be used as input for Horizon 2020, their next framework program.150

The British government announced in March 2014 the founding of the Alan Turing Institute, named after the computer pioneer and codebreaker, which will focus on new ways to collect and analyse large data sets.151

At the University of Waterloo Stratford Campus Canadian Open Data Experience CODE Inspiration Day, participants demonstrated how using data visualization can increase the understanding and appeal of big data sets and communicate their story to the world.152

To make manufacturing more competitive in the United States and globe, there is a need to integrate more American ingenuity and innovation into manufacturing ; Therefore, National Science Foundation has granted the Industry University cooperative research center for Intelligent Maintenance Systems IMS at university of Cincinnati to focus on developing advanced predictive tools and techniques to be applicable in a big data environment.153 In May 2013, IMS Center held an industry advisory board meeting focusing on big data where presenters from various industrial companies discussed their concerns, issues and future goals in big data environment.

Computational social sciences  Anyone can use Application Programming Interfaces APIs provided by big data holders, such as Google and Twitter, to do research in the social and behavioral sciences.154 Often these APIs are provided for free.154 Tobias Preis et al. used Google Trends data to demonstrate that Internet users from countries with a higher per capita gross domestic product GDP are more likely to search for information about the future than information about the past. The findings suggest there may be a link between online behaviour and realworld economic indicators.155156157 The authors of the study examined Google queries logs made by ratio of the volume of searches for the coming year 2011 to the volume of searches for the previous year 2009, which they call the future orientation index.158 They compared the future orientation index to the per capita GDP of each country, and found a strong tendency for countries where Google users inquire more about the future to have a higher GDP. The results hint that there may potentially be a relationship between the economic success of a country and the informationseeking behavior of its citizens captured in big data.

Tobias Preis and his colleagues Helen Susannah Moat and H. Eugene Stanley introduced a method to identify online precursors for stock market moves, using trading strategies based on search volume data provided by Google Trends.159 Their analysis of Google search volume for 98 terms of varying financial relevance, published in Scientific Reports,160 suggests that increases in search volume for financially relevant search terms tend to precede large losses in financial markets.161162163164165166167168

Big data sets come with algorithmic challenges that previously did not exist. Hence, there is a need to fundamentally change the processing ways.169

The Workshops on Algorithms for Modern Massive Data Sets MMDS bring together computer scientists, statisticians, mathematicians, and data analysis practitioners to discuss algorithmic challenges of big data.170

Sampling big data
An important research question that can be asked about big data sets is whether you need to look at the full data to draw certain conclusions about the properties of the data or is a sample good enough. The name big data itself contains a term related to size and this is an important characteristic of big data. But Sampling statistics enables the selection of right data points from within the larger data set to estimate the characteristics of the whole population. For example, there are about 600 million tweets produced every day. Is it necessary to look at all of them to determine the topics that are discussed during the day? Is it necessary to look at all the tweets to determine the sentiment on each of the topics? In manufacturing different types of sensory data such as acoustics, vibration, pressure, current, voltage and controller data are available at short time intervals. To predict downtime it may not be necessary to look at all the data but a sample may be sufficient. Big Data can be broken down by various data point categories such as demographic, psychographic, behavioral, and transactional data. With large sets of data points, marketers are able to create and utilize more customized segments of consumers for more strategic targeting.

There has been some work done in Sampling algorithms for big data. A theoretical formulation for sampling Twitter data has been developed.171

Critique
Critiques of the big data paradigm come in two flavors, those that question the implications of the approach itself, and those that question the way it is currently done.172 One approach to this criticism is the field of Critical data studies.

Critiques of the big data paradigm
A crucial problem is that we do not know much about the underlying empirical microprocesses that lead to the emergence of these typical network characteristics of Big Data.22 In their critique, Snijders, Matzat, and Reips point out that often very strong assumptions are made about mathematical properties that may not at all reflect what is really going on at the level of microprocesses. Mark Graham has leveled broad critiques at Chris Andersons assertion that big data will spell the end of theory:173 focusing in particular on the notion that big data must always be contextualized in their social, economic, and political contexts.174 Even as companies invest eight and ninefigure sums to derive insight from information streaming in from suppliers and customers, less than 40 of employees have sufficiently mature processes and skills to do so. To overcome this insight deficit, big data, no matter how comprehensive or well analysed, must be complemented by big judgment, according to an article in the Harvard Business Review.175

Much in the same line, it has been pointed out that the decisions based on the analysis of big data are inevitably informed by the world as it was in the past, or, at best, as it currently is.70 Fed by a large number of data on past experiences, algorithms can predict future development if the future is similar to the past.176 If the systems dynamics of the future change if it is not a stationary process, the past can say little about the future. In order to make predictions in changing environments, it would be necessary to have a thorough understanding of the systems dynamic, which requires theory.176 As a response to this critique Alemany Oliver and Vayre suggested to use abductive reasoning as a first step in the research process in order to bring context to consumers digital traces and make new theories emerge.177 Additionally, it has been suggested to combine big data approaches with computer simulations, such as agentbased models70 and Complex Systems. Agentbased models are increasingly getting better in predicting the outcome of social complexities of even unknown future scenarios through computer simulations that are based on a collection of mutually interdependent algorithms.178179 Finally, use of multivariate methods that probe for the latent structure of the data, such as factor analysis and cluster analysis, have proven useful as analytic approaches that go well beyond the bivariate approaches crosstabs typically employed with smaller data sets.

In health and biology, conventional scientific approaches are based on experimentation. For these approaches, the limiting factor is the relevant data that can confirm or refute the initial hypothesis.180 A new postulate is accepted now in biosciences: the information provided by the data in huge volumes omics without prior hypothesis is complementary and sometimes necessary to conventional approaches based on experimentation.181182 In the massive approaches it is the formulation of a relevant hypothesis to explain the data that is the limiting factor.183 The search logic is reversed and the limits of induction Glory of Science and Philosophy scandal, C. D. Broad, 1926 are to be considered.citation needed

Privacy advocates are concerned about the threat to privacy represented by increasing storage and integration of personally identifiable information; expert panels have released various policy recommendations to conform practice to expectations of privacy.184185186 The misuse of Big Data in several cases by media, companies and even the government has allowed for abolition of trust in almost every fundamental institution holding up society.187

Nayef AlRodhan argues that a new kind of social contract will be needed to protect individual liberties in a context of Big Data and giant corporations that own vast amounts of information. The use of Big Data should be monitored and better regulated at the national and international levels.188 Barocas and Nissenbaum argue that one way of protecting individual users is by being informed about the types of information being collected, with whom it is shared, under what constrains and for what purposes.189

Critiques of the V Model
The V model of Big Data is concerting as it centres around computational scalability and lacks in a loss around the perceptibility and understandability of information. This led to the framework of Cognitive Big Data, which characterises Big Data application according to:190

Data completeness: understanding of the nonobvious from data;
Data correlation, causation, and predictability: causality as not essential requirement to achieve predictability;
Explainability and interpretability: humans desire to understand and accept what they understand, where algorithms dont cope with this;
Level of automated decision making: algorithms that support automated decision making and algorithmic selflearning;
Critiques of novelty
Large data sets have been analyzed by computing machines for well over a century, including the 1890s US census analytics performed by IBMs punch card machines which computed statistics including means and variances of populations across the whole continent. In more recent decades, science experiments such as CERN have produced data on similar scales to current commercial big data. However science experiments have tended to analyse their data using specialized custombuilt high performance computing supercomputing clusters and grids, rather than clouds of cheap commodity computers as in the current commercial wave, implying a difference in both culture and technology stack.

Critiques of big data execution
UlfDietrich Reips and Uwe Matzat wrote in 2014 that big data had become a fad in scientific research.154 Researcher Danah Boyd has raised concerns about the use of big data in science neglecting principles such as choosing a representative sample by being too concerned about handling the huge amounts of data.191 This approach may lead to results bias in one way or another. Integration across heterogeneous data resourcessome that might be considered big data and others notpresents formidable logistical as well as analytical challenges, but many researchers argue that such integrations are likely to represent the most promising new frontiers in science.192 In the provocative article Critical Questions for Big Data,193 the authors title big data a part of mythology: large data sets offer a higher form of intelligence and knowledge ..., with the aura of truth, objectivity, and accuracy. Users of big data are often lost in the sheer volume of numbers, and working with Big Data is still subjective, and what it quantifies does not necessarily have a closer claim on objective truth.193 Recent developments in BI domain, such as proactive reporting especially target improvements in usability of big data, through automated filtering of nonuseful data and correlations.194

Big data analysis is often shallow compared to analysis of smaller data sets.195 In many big data projects, there is no large data analysis happening, but the challenge is the extract, transform, load part of data preprocessing.195

Big data is a buzzword and a vague term,196197 but at the same time an obsession197 with entrepreneurs, consultants, scientists and the media. Big data showcases such as Google Flu Trends failed to deliver good predictions in recent years, overstating the flu outbreaks by a factor of two. Similarly, Academy awards and election predictions solely based on Twitter were more often off than on target. Big data often poses the same challenges as small data; adding more data does not solve problems of bias, but may emphasize other problems. In particular data sources such as Twitter are not representative of the overall population, and results drawn from such sources may then lead to wrong conclusions. Google Translatewhich is based on big data statistical analysis of textdoes a good job at translating web pages. However, results from specialized domains may be dramatically skewed. On the other hand, big data may also introduce new problems, such as the multiple comparisons problem: simultaneously testing a large set of hypotheses is likely to produce many false results that mistakenly appear significant. Ioannidis argued that most published research findings are false198 due to essentially the same effect: when many scientific teams and researchers each perform many experiments i.e. process a big amount of scientific data; although not with big data technology, the likelihood of a significant result being false grows fast  even more so, when only positive results are published. Furthermore, big data analytics results are only as good as the model on which they are predicated. In an example, big data took part in attempting to predict the results of the 2016 U.S. Presidential Election199 with varying degrees of success. Forbes predicted If you believe in Big Data analytics, its time to begin planning for a Hillary Clinton presidency and all that entails..200

See also
Information technology portal
For a list of companies, and tools, see also: Category:Big data.
Big data ethics
Big Data Maturity Model
Big memory
Data analysis
Data curation
Data defined storage
Data journalism
Data lineage
Data philanthropy
Data quality
Data science
Datafication
Data warehouse
Inmemory processing
List of big data companies
Small data
Statistics
Surveillance capitalism
Urban informatics
References
 The Worlds Technological Capacity to Store, Communicate, and Compute Information. MartinHilbert.net. Retrieved 13 April 2016.
 Breur, Tom July 2016. Statistical Power Analysis and the contemporary crisis in social sciences. Journal of Marketing Analytics. 4 23: 6165. doi:10.1057s4127001600013. ISSN 20503318.
 Laney, Doug 2001. 3D data management: Controlling data volume, velocity and variety. META Group Research Note. 6 70.
 Goes, Paulo B. 2014. Design science research in top information systems journals. MIS Quarterly: Management Information Systems. 38 1: .
 Marr, Bernard 6 March 2014. Big Data: The 5 Vs Everyone Must Know.
 boyd, dana; Crawford, Kate 21 September 2011. Six Provocations for Big Data. Social Science Research Network: A Decade in Internet Time: Symposium on the Dynamics of the Internet and Society. doi:10.2139ssrn.1926431.
 Data, data everywhere. The Economist. 25 February 2010. Retrieved 9 December 2012.
 Community cleverness required. Nature. 455 7209: 1. 4 September 2008. Bibcode:2008Natur.455....1.. doi:10.1038455001a. PMID 18769385.
 Reichman, O.J.; Jones, M.B.; Schildhauer, M.P. 2011. Challenges and Opportunities of Open Data in Ecology. Science. 331 6018: 7035. Bibcode:2011Sci...331..703R. doi:10.1126science.1197962. PMID 21311007.
 Hellerstein, Joe 9 November 2008. Parallel Programming in the Age of Big Data. Gigaom Blog.
 Segaran, Toby; Hammerbacher, Jeff 2009. Beautiful Data: The Stories Behind Elegant Data Solutions. OReilly Media. p. 257. ISBN 9780596157111.
 Hilbert, Martin; Lpez, Priscila 2011. The Worlds Technological Capacity to Store, Communicate, and Compute Information. Science. 332 6025: 6065. Bibcode:2011Sci...332...60H. doi:10.1126science.1200970. PMID 21310967.
 IBM What is big data?  Bringing big data to the enterprise. www.ibm.com. Retrieved 26 August 2013.
 Sh. Hajirahimova, Makrufa; Sciences, Institute of Information Technology of Azerbaijan National Academy of; str., B. Vahabzade; Baku; AZ1141; Azerbaijan; Aliyeva, Aybeniz S. About Big Data Measurement Methodologies and Indicators. International Journal of Modern Education and Computer Science. 9 10: 19. doi:10.5815ijmecs.2017.10.01.
 Reinsel, David; Gantz, John; Rydning, John 13 April 2017. Data Age 2025: The Evolution of Data to LifeCritical PDF. seagate.com. Framingham, MA, US: International Data Corporation. Retrieved 2 November 2017.
 Oracle and FSN, Mastering Big Data: CFO Strategies to Transform Insight into Opportunity, December 2012
 Jacobs, A. 6 July 2009. The Pathologies of Big Data. ACMQueue.
 Magoulas, Roger; Lorica, Ben February 2009. Introduction to Big Data. Release 2.0. Sebastopol CA: OReilly Media 11.
 John R. Mashey 25 April 1998. Big Data ... and the Next Wave of InfraStress PDF. Slides from invited talk. Usenix. Retrieved 28 September 2016.
 Steve Lohr 1 February 2013. The Origins of Big Data: An Etymological Detective Story. The New York Times. Retrieved 28 September 2016.
 Gil Press. A Very Short History of Big Data. Forbes.com. Retrieved 20180424.
 Snijders, C.; Matzat, U.; Reips, U.D. 2012. Big Data: Big gaps of knowledge in the field of Internet. International Journal of Internet Science. 7: 15.
 Dedi, N.; Stanier, C. 2017. Towards Differentiating Business Intelligence, Big Data, Data Analytics and Knowledge Discovery. 285. Berlin ; Heidelberg: Springer International Publishing. ISSN 18651356. OCLC 909580101.
 Everts, Sarah 2016. Information Overload. Distillations. 2 2: 2633. Retrieved 22 March 2018.
 Ibrahim; Targio Hashem, Abaker; Yaqoob, Ibrar; Badrul Anuar, Nor; Mokhtar, Salimah; Gani, Abdullah; Ullah Khan, Samee 2015. big data on cloud computing: Review and open research issues. Information Systems. 47: 98115. doi:10.1016j.is.2014.07.006.
 De Mauro, Andrea; Greco, Marco; Grimaldi, Michele 2016. A Formal definition of Big Data based on its essential Features. Library Review. 65: 122135. doi:10.1108LR0620150061.
 What is Big Data?. Villanova University.
 Grimes, Seth. Big Data: Avoid Wanna V Confusion. InformationWeek. Retrieved 5 January 2016.
 Hilbert, Martin. Big Data for Development: A Review of Promises and Challenges. Development Policy Review. martinhilbert.net. Retrieved 7 October 2015.
 DTSC 73: What is Big Data?. YouTube. 12 August 2015.
 MayerSchnberger, V.,  Cukier, K. 2013. Big data: a revolution that will transform how we live, work and think. London: John Murray.
 Digital Technology  Social Change. Canvas.instructure.com. Retrieved 8 October 2017.
 Fox, Charles 20180325. Data Science for Transport. Springer.
 avec focalisation sur Big Data  Analytique PDF. Bigdataparis.com. Retrieved 8 October 2017.
 Billings S.A. Nonlinear System Identification: NARMAX Methods in the Time, Frequency, and SpatioTemporal Domains. Wiley, 2013
 le Blog ANDSI  DSI Big Data. Andsi.fr. Retrieved 8 October 2017.
 Les Echos 3 April 2013. Les Echos  Big Data car LowDensity Data ? La faible densit en information comme facteur discriminant  Archives. Lesechos.fr. Retrieved 8 October 2017.
 Big Datas Fourth V
 Lee, Jay; Bagheri, Behrad; Kao, HungAn 2014. Recent Advances and Trends of CyberPhysical Systems and Big Data Analytics in Industrial Informatics. IEEE Int. Conference on Industrial Informatics INDIN 2014.
 Lee, Jay; Lapira, Edzel; Bagheri, Behrad; Kao, Hungan. Recent advances and trends in predictive manufacturing systems in big data environment. Manufacturing Letters. 1 1: 3841. doi:10.1016j.mfglet.2013.09.005.
 Survey: Biggest Databases Approach 30 Terabytes. Eweek.com. Retrieved 8 October 2017.
 LexisNexis To Buy Seisint For 775 Million. Washington Post. Retrieved 15 July 2004.
 LexisNexis Parent Set to Buy ChoicePoint. Washington Post. Retrieved 22 February 2008.
 Quantcast Opens ExabyteReady File System. www.datanami.com. Retrieved 1 October 2012.
 Bertolucci, Jeff Hadoop: From Experiment To Leading Big Data Platform, Information Week, 2013. Retrieved on 14 November 2013.
 Webster, John. MapReduce: Simplified Data Processing on Large Clusters, Search Storage, 2004. Retrieved on 25 March 2013.
 Big Data Solution Offering. MIKE2.0. Retrieved 8 December 2013.
 Big Data Definition. MIKE2.0. Retrieved 9 March 2013.
 Boja, C; Pocovnicu, A; Btgan, L. 2012. Distributed Parallel Architecture for Big Data. Informatica Economica. 16 2: 116127.
 SOLVING KEY BUSINESS CHALLENGES WITH A BIG DATA LAKE PDF. Hcltech.com. August 2014. Retrieved 8 October 2017.
 Method for testing the fault tolerance of MapReduce frameworks PDF. Computer Networks. 2015.
 IMSCPS  IMS Center. Imscenter.net. Retrieved 16 June 2016.
 Wu, D., Liu. X., Hebert, S., Gentzsch, W., Terpenny, J. 2015. Performance Evaluation of CloudBased High Performance Computing for Finite Element Analysis. Proceedings of the ASME 2015 International Design Engineering Technical Conference  Computers and Information in Engineering Conference IDETCCIE2015, Boston, Massachusetts, U.S.
 Wu, D.; Rosen, D.W.; Wang, L.; Schaefer, D. 2015. CloudBased Design and Manufacturing: A New Paradigm in Digital Manufacturing and Design Innovation. ComputerAided Design. 59 1: 114. doi:10.1016j.cad.2014.07.006.
 Manyika, James; Chui, Michael; Bughin, Jaques; Brown, Brad; Dobbs, Richard; Roxburgh, Charles; Byers, Angela Hung May 2011. Big Data: The next frontier for innovation, competition, and productivity. McKinsey Global Institute. Retrieved 16 January 2016.
 Future Directions in TensorBased Computation and Modeling PDF. May 2009.
 Lu, Haiping; Plataniotis, K.N.; Venetsanopoulos, A.N. 2011. A Survey of Multilinear Subspace Learning for Tensor Data PDF. Pattern Recognition. 44 7: 15401551. doi:10.1016j.patcog.2011.01.004.
 Pllana, Sabri; Janciak, Ivan; Brezany, Peter; Whrer, Alexander. A Survey of the State of the Art in Data Mining and Integration Query Languages. 2011 International Conference on NetworkBased Information Systems NBIS 2011. IEEE Computer Society. Retrieved 2 April 2016.
 Characterization and Optimization of MemoryResident MapReduce on HPC Systems PDF. IEEE. October 2014.
 LHeureux, A.; Grolinger, K.; Elyamany, H. F.; Capretz, M. A. M. 2017. Machine Learning With Big Data: Challenges and Approaches. IEEE Access. 5: 77767797. doi:10.1109ACCESS.2017.2696365. ISSN 21693536.
 Monash, Curt 30 April 2009. eBays two enormous data warehouses.
Monash, Curt 6 October 2010. eBay followup  Greenplum out, Teradata  10 petabytes, Hadoop has some value, and more.
 Resources on how Topological Data Analysis is used to analyze big data. Ayasdi.
 CNET News 1 April 2011. Storage area networks need not apply.
 How New Analytic Systems will Impact Storage. September 2011. Archived from the original on 1 March 2012.
 Hilbert, Martin 2014. What is the Content of the Worlds Technologically Mediated Information and Communication Capacity: How Much Text, Image, Audio, and Video?. The Information Society. 30 2: 127143. doi:10.108001972243.2013.873748.
 Rajpurohit, Anmol 11 July 2014. Interview: Amy Gershkoff, Director of Customer Analytics  Insights, eBay on How to Design Custom InHouse BI Tools. KDnuggets. Retrieved 14 July 2014. Dr. Amy Gershkoff: Generally, I find that offtheshelf business intelligence tools do not meet the needs of clients who want to derive custom insights from their data. Therefore, for mediumtolarge organizations with access to strong technical talent, I usually recommend building custom, inhouse solutions.
 The Government and big data: Use, problems and potential. Computerworld. 21 March 2012. Retrieved 12 September 2016.
 White Paper: Big Data for Development: Opportunities  Challenges 2012  United Nations Global Pulse. Unglobalpulse.org. Retrieved 13 April 2016.
 WEF World Economic Forum,  Vital Wave Consulting. 2012. Big Data, Big Impact: New Possibilities for International Development. World Economic Forum. Retrieved 24 August 2012.
 Big Data for Development: From Information to Knowledge Societies. SSRN 2205145. Missing or empty url help
 Elena Kvochko, Four Ways To talk About Big Data Information Communication Technologies for Development Series. worldbank.org. 20121204. Retrieved 30 May 2012.
 Daniele Medri: Big Data  Business: An ongoing revolution. Statistics Views. 21 October 2013.
 Tobias Knobloch and Julia Manske 11 January 2016. Responsible use of data. DC, Development and Cooperation.
 Lee, Jay; Wu, F.; Zhao, W.; Ghaffari, M.; Liao, L January 2013. Prognostics and health management design for rotary machinery systemsReviews, methodology and applications. Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing. 42 1.
 Tutorials. PHM Society. Retrieved 27 September 2016.
 Prognostic and Health Management Technology for MOCVD Equipment. Industrial Technology Research Institute. Retrieved 27 September 2016.
 Huser, Vojtech; Cimino, James J. 2016. Impending Challenges for the Use of Big Data. International Journal of Radiation OncologyBiologyPhysics. 95 3: 890894. doi:10.1016j.ijrobp.2015.10.060. PMC 4860172. PMID 26797535.
 ODonoghue, John; Herbert, John 1 October 2012. Data Management Within mHealth Environments: Patient Sensors, Mobile Devices, and Databases. Journal of Data and Information Quality. 4 1: 5:15:20. doi:10.11452378016.2378021.
 Mirkes, E.M.; Coats, T.J.; Levesley, J.; Gorban, A.N. 2016. Handling missing data in large healthcare dataset: A case study of unknown trauma outcomes. Computers in Biology and Medicine. 75: 203216. arXiv:1604.00627. doi:10.1016j.compbiomed.2016.06.004. PMID 27318570.
 Murdoch, Travis B.; Detsky, Allan S. 3 April 2013. The Inevitable Application of Big Data to Health Care. JAMA. 309 13: 13512. doi:10.1001jama.2013.393. ISSN 00987484. PMID 23549579.
 Vayena, Effy; Salath, Marcel; Madoff, Lawrence C.; Brownstein, John S. 20150209. Ethical Challenges of Big Data in Public Health. PLOS Computational Biology. 11 2: e1003904. doi:10.1371journal.pcbi.1003904. ISSN 15537358. PMC 4321985. PMID 25664461.
 Degrees in Big Data: Fad or Fast Track to Career Success. Forbes. Retrieved 21 February 2016.
 NY gets new boot camp for data scientists: Its free but harder to get into than Harvard. Venture Beat. Retrieved 21 February 2016.
 Wedel, Michel; Kannan, PK 2016. Marketing Analytics for DataRich Environments. Journal of Marketing. 80 6: 97121. doi:10.1509jm.15.0413.
 Couldry, Nick; Turow, Joseph 2014. Advertising, Big Data, and the Clearance of the Public Realm: Marketers New Approaches to the Content Subsidy. International Journal of Communication. 8: 17101726.
 Why Digital Advertising Agencies Suck at Acquisition and are in Dire Need of an AI Assisted Upgrade. Ishti.org. 20180415. Retrieved 15 April 2018.
 Big data and analytics: C4 and Genius Digital. Ibc.org. Retrieved 8 October 2017.
 Marshall Allen 17 July 2018. Health Insurers Are Vacuuming Up Details About You  And It Could Raise Your Rates. www.propublica.org. Retrieved 21 July 2018.
 QuiO Named Innovation Champion of the Accenture HealthTech Innovation Challenge. Businesswire.com. 20170110. Retrieved 8 October 2017.
 A Software Platform for Operational Technology Innovation PDF. Predix.com. Retrieved 8 October 2017.
 Z. Jenipher Wang March 2017. Big Data Driven Smart Transportation: the Underlying Story of IoT Transformed Mobility.
 That Internet Of Things Thing.
 Solnik, Ray. The Time Has Come: Analytics Delivers for IT Operations. Data Center Journal. Retrieved 21 June 2016.
 Josh Rogin August 2, 2018. Ethnic cleansing makes a comeback  in China Washington Post. Retrieved August 4, 2018. Add to that the unprecedented security and surveillance state in Xinjiang, which includes allencompassing monitoring based on identity cards, checkpoints, facial recognition and the collection of DNA from millions of individuals. The authorities feed all this data into an artificialintelligence machine that rates peoples loyalty to the Communist Party in order to control every aspect of their lives.
 China: Big Data Fuels Crackdown in Minority Region: Predictive Policing Program Flags Individuals for Investigations, Detentions. hrw.org. Human Rights Watch. February 26, 2018. Retrieved August 4, 2018.
 News: Live Mint. Are Indian companies making enough sense of Big Data?. Live Mint. 23 June 2014. Retrieved 22 November 2014.
 Startup nation turns big data nation  a look at Israels top big data startups. analyticsindiamag.com. Retrieved 20180228.
 Israeli startup uses big data, minimal hardware to treat diabetes. Retrieved 20180228.
 Survey on Big Data Using Data Mining PDF. International Journal of Engineering Development and Research. 2015. Retrieved 14 September 2016.
 Recent advances delivered by Mobile Cloud Computing and Internet of Things for Big Data applications: a survey. International Journal of Network Management. 11 March 2016. Retrieved 14 September 2016.
 Kalil, Tom. Big Data is a Big Deal. White House. Retrieved 26 September 2012.
 Executive Office of the President March 2012. Big Data Across the Federal Government PDF. White House. Archived from the original PDF on 19 October 2012. Retrieved 26 September 2012.
 Lampitt, Andrew. The real story of how big data analytics helped Obama win. Infoworld. Retrieved 31 May 2014.
 https:www.top500.orglists201811
 Hoover, J. Nicholas. Governments 10 Most Powerful Supercomputers. Information Week. UBM. Retrieved 26 September 2012.
 Bamford, James 15 March 2012. The NSA Is Building the Countrys Biggest Spy Center Watch What You Say. Wired Magazine. Retrieved 18 March 2013.
 Groundbreaking Ceremony Held for 1.2 Billion Utah Data Center. National Security Agency Central Security Service. Retrieved 18 March 2013.
 Hill, Kashmir. Blueprints of NSAs Ridiculously Expensive Data Center in Utah Suggest It Holds Less Info Than Thought. Forbes. Retrieved 31 October 2013.
 Smith, Gerry; Hallman, Ben 20130612. NSA Spying Controversy Highlights Embrace Of Big Data. Huffington Post. Retrieved 20180507.
 Wingfield, Nick 12 March 2013. Predicting Commutes More Accurately for WouldBe Home Buyers  NYTimes.com. Bits.blogs.nytimes.com. Retrieved 21 July 2013.
 FICO Falcon Fraud Manager. Fico.com. Retrieved 21 July 2013.
 Alexandru, Dan. Prof PDF. cds.cern.ch. CERN. Retrieved 24 March 2015.
 LHC Brochure, English version. A presentation of the largest and the most powerful particle accelerator in the world, the Large Hadron Collider LHC, which started up in 2008. Its role, characteristics, technologies, etc. are explained for the general public. CERNBrochure2010006Eng. LHC Brochure, English version. CERN. Retrieved 20 January 2013.
 LHC Guide, English version. A collection of facts and figures about the Large Hadron Collider LHC in the form of questions and answers. CERNBrochure2008001Eng. LHC Guide, English version. CERN. Retrieved 20 January 2013.
 Brumfiel, Geoff 19 January 2011. Highenergy physics: Down the petabyte highway. Nature. 469. pp. 28283. Bibcode:2011Natur.469..282B. doi:10.1038469282a.
 IBM Research  Zurich PDF. Zurich.ibm.com. Retrieved 8 October 2017.
 Future telescope array drives development of Exabyte processing. Ars Technica. Retrieved 15 April 2015.
 Australias bid for the Square Kilometre Array  an insiders perspective. The Conversation. 1 February 2012. Retrieved 27 September 2016.
 Delort P., OECD ICCP Technology Foresight Forum, 2012 PDF. Oecd.org. Retrieved 8 October 2017.
 NASA  NASA Goddard Introduces the NASA Center for Climate Simulation. Nasa.gov. Retrieved 13 April 2016.
 Webster, Phil. Supercomputing the Climate: NASAs Big Data Mission. CSC World. Computer Sciences Corporation. Archived from the original on 4 January 2013. Retrieved 18 January 2013.
 These six great neuroscience ideas could make the leap from lab to market. The Globe and Mail. 20 November 2014. Retrieved 1 October 2016.
 DNAstack tackles massive, complex DNA datasets with Google Genomics. Google Cloud Platform. Retrieved 1 October 2016.
 23andMe  Ancestry. 23andme.com. Retrieved 29 December 2016.
 Potenza, Alessandra 13 July 2016. 23andMe wants researchers to use its kits, in a bid to expand its collection of genetic data. The Verge. Retrieved 29 December 2016.
 This Startup Will Sequence Your DNA, So You Can Contribute To Medical Research. Fast Company. 23 December 2016. Retrieved 29 December 2016.
 Seife, Charles. 23andMe Is Terrifying, but Not for the Reasons the FDA Thinks. Scientific American. Retrieved 29 December 2016.
 Zaleski, Andrew 22 June 2016. This biotech startup is betting your genes will yield the next wonder drug. CNBC. Retrieved 29 December 2016.
 Regalado, Antonio. How 23andMe turned your DNA into a 1 billion drug discovery machine. MIT Technology Review. Retrieved 29 December 2016.
 23andMe reports jump in requests for data in wake of Pfizer depression study  FierceBiotech. fiercebiotech.com. Retrieved 29 December 2016.
 Admire Moyo. Data scientists predict Springbok defeat. www.itweb.co.za. Retrieved 12 December 2015.
 Regina Pazvakavambwa. Predictive analytics, big data transform sports. www.itweb.co.za. Retrieved 12 December 2015.
 Rich Miller. The Lessons of Moneyball for Big Data Analysis. www.datecenterknowledge.com. Retrieved 12 December 2015.
 Dave Ryan. Sports: Where Big Data Finally Makes Sense. www.huffingtonpost.com. Retrieved 12 December 2015.
 Frank Bi. How Formula One Teams Are Using Big Data To Get The Inside Edge. www.forbes.com. Retrieved 12 December 2015.
 Tay, Liz. Inside eBays 90PB data warehouse. ITNews. Retrieved 12 February 2016.
 Layton, Julia. Amazon Technology. Money.howstuffworks.com. Retrieved 5 March 2013.
 Scaling Facebook to 500 Million Users and Beyond. Facebook.com. Retrieved 21 July 2013.
 Constine, Josh 27 June 2017. Facebook now has 2 billion monthly users and responsibility. TechCrunch. Retrieved 3 September 2018.
 Google Still Doing at Least 1 Trillion Searches Per Year. Search Engine Land. 16 January 2015. Retrieved 15 April 2015.
 Siwach, Gautam; Esmailpour, Amir March 2014. Encrypted Search  Cluster Formation in Big Data PDF. ASEE 2014 Zone I Conference. University of Bridgeport, Bridgeport, Connecticut, US.
 Obama Administration Unveils Big Data Initiative:Announces 200 Million In New RD Investments PDF. The White House. Archived from the original PDF on 1 November 2012.
 AMPLab at the University of California, Berkeley. Amplab.cs.berkeley.edu. Retrieved 5 March 2013.
 NSF Leads Federal Efforts in Big Data. National Science Foundation NSF. 29 March 2012.
 Timothy Hunter; Teodor Moldovan; Matei Zaharia; Justin Ma; Michael Franklin; Pieter Abbeel; Alexandre Bayen October 2011. Scaling the Mobile Millennium System in the Cloud.
 David Patterson 5 December 2011. Computer Scientists May Have What It Takes to Help Cure Cancer. The New York Times.
 Secretary Chu Announces New Institute to Help Scientists Improve Massive Data Set Research on DOE Supercomputers. energy.gov.
 Governor Patrick announces new initiative to strengthen Massachusetts position as a World leader in Big Data. Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
 Big Data  CSAIL. Bigdata.csail.mit.edu. 22 February 2013. Retrieved 5 March 2013.
 Big Data Public Private Forum. Cordis.europa.eu. 1 September 2012. Archived from the original on 20 May 2013. Retrieved 5 March 2013.
 Alan Turing Institute to be set up to research big data. BBC News. 19 March 2014. Retrieved 19 March 2014.
 Inspiration day at University of Waterloo, Stratford Campus. betakit.com. Retrieved 28 February 2014.
 Lee, Jay; Lapira, Edzel; Bagheri, Behrad; Kao, HungAn 2013. Recent Advances and Trends in Predictive Manufacturing Systems in Big Data Environment. Manufacturing Letters. 1 1: 3841. doi:10.1016j.mfglet.2013.09.005.
 Reips, UlfDietrich; Matzat, Uwe 2014. Mining Big Data using Big Data Services. International Journal of Internet Science. 1 1: 18.
 Preis, Tobias; Moat,, Helen Susannah; Stanley, H. Eugene; Bishop, Steven R. 2012. Quantifying the Advantage of Looking Forward. Scientific Reports. 2: 350. Bibcode:2012NatSR...2E.350P. doi:10.1038srep00350. PMC 3320057. PMID 22482034.
 Marks, Paul 5 April 2012. Online searches for future linked to economic success. New Scientist. Retrieved 9 April 2012.
 Johnston, Casey 6 April 2012. Google Trends reveals clues about the mentality of richer nations. Ars Technica. Retrieved 9 April 2012.
 Tobias Preis 24 May 2012. Supplementary Information: The Future Orientation Index is available for download PDF. Retrieved 24 May 2012.
 Philip Ball 26 April 2013. Counting Google searches predicts market movements. Nature. Retrieved 9 August 2013.
 Tobias Preis, Helen Susannah Moat and H. Eugene Stanley 2013. Quantifying Trading Behavior in Financial Markets Using Google Trends. Scientific Reports. 3: 1684. Bibcode:2013NatSR...3E1684P. doi:10.1038srep01684. PMC 3635219. PMID 23619126.
 Nick Bilton 26 April 2013. Google Search Terms Can Predict Stock Market, Study Finds. The New York Times. Retrieved 9 August 2013.
 Christopher Matthews 26 April 2013. Trouble With Your Investment Portfolio? Google It!. TIME Magazine. Retrieved 9 August 2013.
 Philip Ball 26 April 2013. Counting Google searches predicts market movements. Nature. Retrieved 9 August 2013.
 Bernhard Warner 25 April 2013. Big Data Researchers Turn to Google to Beat the Markets. Bloomberg Businessweek. Retrieved 9 August 2013.
 Hamish McRae 28 April 2013. Hamish McRae: Need a valuable handle on investor sentiment? Google it. The Independent. London. Retrieved 9 August 2013.
 Richard Waters 25 April 2013. Google search proves to be new word in stock market prediction. Financial Times. Retrieved 9 August 2013.
 David Leinweber 26 April 2013. Big Data Gets Bigger: Now Google Trends Can Predict The Market. Forbes. Retrieved 9 August 2013.
 Jason Palmer 25 April 2013. Google searches predict market moves. BBC. Retrieved 9 August 2013.
 E. Sejdi, Adapt current tools for use with big data, Nature, vol. vol. 507, no. 7492, pp. 306, Mar. 2014.
 Stanford. MMDS. Workshop on Algorithms for Modern Massive Data Sets.
 Deepan Palguna; Vikas Joshi; Venkatesan Chakaravarthy; Ravi Kothari  L. V. Subramaniam 2015. Analysis of Sampling Algorithms for Twitter. International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence.
 Kimble, C.; Milolidakis, G. 2015. Big Data and Business Intelligence: Debunking the Myths. Global Business and Organizational Excellence. 35 1: 2334. arXiv:1511.03085. doi:10.1002joe.21642.
 Chris Anderson 23 June 2008. The End of Theory: The Data Deluge Makes the Scientific Method Obsolete. WIRED.
 Graham M. 9 March 2012. Big data and the end of theory?. The Guardian. London.
 Good Data Wont Guarantee Good Decisions. Harvard Business Review. Shah, Shvetank; Horne, Andrew; Capell, Jaime;. HBR.org. Retrieved 8 September 2012.
 Big Data requires Big Visions for Big Change., Hilbert, M. 2014. London: TEDxUCL, xindependently organized TED talks
 Alemany Oliver, Mathieu; Vayre, JeanSebastien 2015. Big Data and the Future of Knowledge Production in Marketing Research: Ethics, Digital Traces, and Abductive Reasoning. Journal of Marketing Analytics. 3 1: 513. doi:10.1057jma.2015.1.
 Jonathan Rauch 1 April 2002. Seeing Around Corners. The Atlantic.
 Epstein, J. M.,  Axtell, R. L. 1996. Growing Artificial Societies: Social Science from the Bottom Up. A Bradford Book.
 Delort P., Big data in Biosciences, Big Data Paris, 2012 PDF. Bigdataparis.com. Retrieved 8 October 2017.
 Nextgeneration genomics: an integrative approach PDF. nature. July 2010. Retrieved 18 October 2016.
 BIG DATA IN BIOSCIENCES. ResearchGate. October 2015. Retrieved 18 October 2016.
 Big data: are we making a big mistake?. Financial Times. 28 March 2014. Retrieved 20 October 2016.
 Ohm, Paul. Dont Build a Database of Ruin. Harvard Business Review.
 Darwin BondGraham, Iron Cagebook  The Logical End of Facebooks Patents, Counterpunch.org, 2013.12.03
 Darwin BondGraham, Inside the Tech industrys Startup Conference, Counterpunch.org, 2013.09.11
 Darwin BondGraham, The Perspective on Big Data, ThePerspective.com, 2018
 AlRodhan, Nayef 16 September 2014. The Social Contract 2.0: Big Data and the Need to Guarantee Privacy and Civil Liberties  Harvard International Review. Harvard International Review. Retrieved 3 April 2017.
 Barocas, Solon; Nissenbaum, Helen; Lane, Julia; Stodden, Victoria; Bender, Stefan; Nissenbaum, Helen June 2014. Big Datas End Run around Anonymity and Consent. Cambridge University Press. pp. 4475. doi:10.1017cbo9781107590205.004. ISBN 9781107067356.
 Lugmayr, Artur; Stockleben, Bjoern; Scheib, Christoph; Mailaparampil, Mathew; Mesia, Noora; Ranta, Hannu; Lab, Emmi 20160601. A COMPREHENSIVE SURVEY ON BIGDATA RESEARCH AND ITS IMPLICATIONS  WHAT IS REALLY NEW IN BIG DATA? ITS COGNITIVE BIG DATA!.
 danah boyd 29 April 2010. Privacy and Publicity in the Context of Big Data. WWW 2010 conference. Retrieved 18 April 2011.
 Jones, MB; Schildhauer, MP; Reichman, OJ; Bowers, S 2006. The New Bioinformatics: Integrating Ecological Data from the Gene to the Biosphere PDF. Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution, and Systematics. 37 1: 519544. doi:10.1146annurev.ecolsys.37.091305.110031.
 Boyd, D.; Crawford, K. 2012. Critical Questions for Big Data. Information, Communication  Society. 15 5: 662679. doi:10.10801369118X.2012.678878.
 Failure to Launch: From Big Data to Big Decisions, Forte Wares.
 Gregory Piatetsky 12 August 2014. Interview: Michael Berthold, KNIME Founder, on Research, Creativity, Big Data, and Privacy, Part 2. KDnuggets. Retrieved 13 August 2014.
 Pelt, Mason. Big Data is an over used buzzword and this Twitter bot proves it. siliconangle.com. SiliconANGLE. Retrieved 4 November 2015.
 Harford, Tim 28 March 2014. Big data: are we making a big mistake?. Financial Times. Financial Times. Retrieved 7 April 2014.
 Ioannidis, J. P. A. 2005. Why Most Published Research Findings Are False. PLoS Medicine. 2 8: e124. doi:10.1371journal.pmed.0020124. PMC 1182327. PMID 16060722.
 Lohr, Steve; Singer, Natasha 10 November 2016. How Data Failed Us in Calling an Election. The New York Times. ISSN 03624331. Retrieved 27 November 2016.
 Markman, Jon. Big Data And The 2016 Election. Forbes. Retrieved 27 November 2016.
Further reading
Karolin Kappler, JanFelix Schrape, Lena Ulbricht, Johannes Weyer 2018. Societal Implications of Big Data. KI  Knstliche Intelligenz. Vol. 32 no. 1. Springer. doi:10.1007s132180170520x..
Peter Kinnaird, Inbal TalgamCohen, eds. 2012. Big Data. XRDS: Crossroads, The ACM Magazine for Students. Vol. 19 no. 1. Association for Computing Machinery. ISSN 15284980. OCLC 779657714.
Jure Leskovec; Anand Rajaraman; Jeffrey D. Ullman 2014. Mining of massive datasets. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9781107077232. OCLC 888463433.
Viktor MayerSchnberger; Kenneth Cukier 2013. Big Data: A Revolution that Will Transform how We Live, Work, and Think. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. ISBN 9781299903029. OCLC 828620988.
Press, Gil 9 May 2013. A Very Short History Of Big Data. forbes.com. Jersey City, NJ: Forbes Magazine. Retrieved 17 September 2016.
Big Data: The Management Revolution. hbr.org. Harvard Business Review.
ONeil, Cathy 2017. Weapons of Math Destruction: How Big Data Increases Inequality and Threatens Democracy. Broadway Books. ISBN 9780553418835.
External links
 Media related to Big data at Wikimedia Commons
 The dictionary definition of big data at Wiktionary
Authority control Edit this at Wikidata
GND: 48026207 LCCN: sh2012003227 NDL: 001147262
Categories: Big dataData managementDistributed computing problemsTransaction processingTechnology forecasting

Page protected with pending changes
Artificial intelligence
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
AI redirects here. For other uses, see AI disambiguation and Artificial intelligence disambiguation.
Artificial intelligence
Major goals
Knowledge reasoning
Planning
Machine learning
Natural language processing
Computer vision
Robotics
Artificial general intelligence
Approaches
Symbolic
Deep learning
Bayesian networks
Evolutionary algorithms
Philosophy
Ethics
Existential risk
Turing test
Chinese room
Friendly AI
History
Timeline
Progress
AI winter
Technology
Applications
Projects
Programming languages
Glossary
Glossary
vte
Artificial intelligence AI, sometimes called machine intelligence, is intelligence demonstrated by machines, in contrast to the natural intelligence displayed by humans and other animals. In computer science AI research is defined as the study of intelligent agents: any device that perceives its environment and takes actions that maximize its chance of successfully achieving its goals.1 Colloquially, the term artificial intelligence is applied when a machine mimics cognitive functions that humans associate with other human minds, such as learning and problem solving.2

The scope of AI is disputed: as machines become increasingly capable, tasks considered as requiring intelligence are often removed from the definition, a phenomenon known as the AI effect, leading to the quip in Teslers Theorem, AI is whatever hasnt been done yet.3 For instance, optical character recognition is frequently excluded from artificial intelligence, having become a routine technology.4 Modern machine capabilities generally classified as AI include successfully understanding human speech,5 competing at the highest level in strategic game systems such as chess and Go,6 autonomously operating cars, and intelligent routing in content delivery networks and military simulations.

Artificial intelligence was founded as an academic discipline in 1956, and in the years since has experienced several waves of optimism,78 followed by disappointment and the loss of funding known as an AI winter,910 followed by new approaches, success and renewed funding.811 For most of its history, AI research has been divided into subfields that often fail to communicate with each other.12 These subfields are based on technical considerations, such as particular goals e.g. robotics or machine learning,13 the use of particular tools logic or artificial neural networks, or deep philosophical differences.141516 Subfields have also been based on social factors particular institutions or the work of particular researchers.12

The traditional problems or goals of AI research include reasoning, knowledge representation, planning, learning, natural language processing, perception and the ability to move and manipulate objects.13 General intelligence is among the fields longterm goals.17 Approaches include statistical methods, computational intelligence, and traditional symbolic AI. Many tools are used in AI, including versions of search and mathematical optimization, artificial neural networks, and methods based on statistics, probability and economics. The AI field draws upon computer science, information engineering, mathematics, psychology, linguistics, philosophy, and many others.

The field was founded on the claim that human intelligence can be so precisely described that a machine can be made to simulate it.18 This raises philosophical arguments about the nature of the mind and the ethics of creating artificial beings endowed with humanlike intelligence which are issues that have been explored by myth, fiction and philosophy since antiquity.19 Some people also consider AI to be a danger to humanity if it progresses unabated.20 Others believe that AI, unlike previous technological revolutions, will create a risk of mass unemployment.21However Google is hosting a global contest to develop AI thats beneficial for humanity22

In the twentyfirst century, AI techniques have experienced a resurgence following concurrent advances in computer power, large amounts of data, and theoretical understanding; and AI techniques have become an essential part of the technology industry, helping to solve many challenging problems in computer science, software engineering and operations research.2311


Contents
1History
2Basics
3Problems
3.1Reasoning, problem solving
3.2Knowledge representation
3.3Planning
3.4Learning
3.5Natural language processing
3.6Perception
3.7Motion and manipulation
3.8Social intelligence
3.9General intelligence
4Approaches
4.1Cybernetics and brain simulation
4.2Symbolic
4.3Subsymbolic
4.4Statistical learning
4.5Integrating the approaches
5Tools
5.1Search and optimization
5.2Logic
5.3Probabilistic methods for uncertain reasoning
5.4Classifiers and statistical learning methods
5.5Artificial neural networks
5.6Evaluating progress
6Applications
6.1Healthcare
6.2Automotive
6.3Finance and economics
6.4Video games
6.5Military
6.6Audit
6.7Advertising
6.8Art
7Philosophy and ethics
7.1The limits of artificial general intelligence
7.2Potential harm
7.3Ethical machines
7.4Machine consciousness, sentience and mind
7.5Superintelligence
8In fiction
9See also
10Explanatory notes
11References
11.1AI textbooks
11.2History of AI
11.3Other sources
12Further reading
13External links
History
Main articles: History of artificial intelligence and Timeline of artificial intelligence

Talos, an ancient mythical automaton with artificial intelligence
Thoughtcapable artificial beings appeared as storytelling devices in antiquity,24 and have been common in fiction, as in Mary Shelleys Frankenstein or Karel apeks R.U.R. Rossums Universal Robots.25 These characters and their fates raised many of the same issues now discussed in the ethics of artificial intelligence.19

The study of mechanical or formal reasoning began with philosophers and mathematicians in antiquity. The study of mathematical logic led directly to Alan Turings theory of computation, which suggested that a machine, by shuffling symbols as simple as 0 and 1, could simulate any conceivable act of mathematical deduction. This insight, that digital computers can simulate any process of formal reasoning, is known as the ChurchTuring thesis.26 Along with concurrent discoveries in neurobiology, information theory and cybernetics, this led researchers to consider the possibility of building an electronic brain. Turing proposed that if a human could not distinguish between responses from a machine and a human, the machine could be considered intelligent.27 The first work that is now generally recognized as AI was McCullouch and Pitts 1943 formal design for Turingcomplete artificial neurons.28

The field of AI research was born at a workshop at Dartmouth College in 1956.29 Attendees Allen Newell CMU, Herbert Simon CMU, John McCarthy MIT, Marvin Minsky MIT and Arthur Samuel IBM became the founders and leaders of AI research.30 They and their students produced programs that the press described as astonishing:31 computers were learning checkers strategies c. 195432 and by 1959 were reportedly playing better than the average human,33 solving word problems in algebra, proving logical theorems Logic Theorist, first run c. 1956 and speaking English.34 By the middle of the 1960s, research in the U.S. was heavily funded by the Department of Defense35 and laboratories had been established around the world.36 AIs founders were optimistic about the future: Herbert Simon predicted, machines will be capable, within twenty years, of doing any work a man can do. Marvin Minsky agreed, writing, within a generation ... the problem of creating artificial intelligence will substantially be solved.7

They failed to recognize the difficulty of some of the remaining tasks. Progress slowed and in 1974, in response to the criticism of Sir James Lighthill37 and ongoing pressure from the US Congress to fund more productive projects, both the U.S. and British governments cut off exploratory research in AI. The next few years would later be called an AI winter,9 a period when obtaining funding for AI projects was difficult.

In the early 1980s, AI research was revived by the commercial success of expert systems,38 a form of AI program that simulated the knowledge and analytical skills of human experts. By 1985, the market for AI had reached over a billion dollars. At the same time, Japans fifth generation computer project inspired the U.S and British governments to restore funding for academic research.8 However, beginning with the collapse of the Lisp Machine market in 1987, AI once again fell into disrepute, and a second, longerlasting hiatus began.10

In the late 1990s and early 21st century, AI began to be used for logistics, data mining, medical diagnosis and other areas.23 The success was due to increasing computational power see Moores law, greater emphasis on solving specific problems, new ties between AI and other fields such as statistics, economics and mathematics, and a commitment by researchers to mathematical methods and scientific standards.39 Deep Blue became the first computer chessplaying system to beat a reigning world chess champion, Garry Kasparov, on 11 May 1997.40

In 2011, a Jeopardy! quiz show exhibition match, IBMs question answering system, Watson, defeated the two greatest Jeopardy! champions, Brad Rutter and Ken Jennings, by a significant margin.41 Faster computers, algorithmic improvements, and access to large amounts of data enabled advances in machine learning and perception; datahungry deep learning methods started to dominate accuracy benchmarks around 2012.42 The Kinect, which provides a 3D bodymotion interface for the Xbox 360 and the Xbox One, uses algorithms that emerged from lengthy AI research43 as do intelligent personal assistants in smartphones.44 In March 2016, AlphaGo won 4 out of 5 games of Go in a match with Go champion Lee Sedol, becoming the first computer Goplaying system to beat a professional Go player without handicaps.645 In the 2017 Future of Go Summit, AlphaGo won a threegame match with Ke Jie,46 who at the time continuously held the world No. 1 ranking for two years.4748 This marked the completion of a significant milestone in the development of Artificial Intelligence as Go is an extremely complex game, more so than Chess.

According to Bloombergs Jack Clark, 2015 was a landmark year for artificial intelligence, with the number of software projects that use AI within Google increased from a sporadic usage in 2012 to more than 2,700 projects. Clark also presents factual data indicating that error rates in image processing tasks have fallen significantly since 2011.49 He attributes this to an increase in affordable neural networks, due to a rise in cloud computing infrastructure and to an increase in research tools and datasets.11 Other cited examples include Microsofts development of a Skype system that can automatically translate from one language to another and Facebooks system that can describe images to blind people.49 In a 2017 survey, one in five companies reported they had incorporated AI in some offerings or processes.5051 Around 2016, China greatly accelerated its government funding; given its large supply of data and its rapidly increasing research output, some observers believe it may be on track to becoming an AI superpower.5253

Basics
A typical AI perceives its environment and takes actions that maximize its chance of successfully achieving its goals.1 An AIs intended goal function can be simple 1 if the AI wins a game of Go, 0 otherwise or complex Do actions mathematically similar to the actions that got you rewards in the past. Goals can be explicitly defined, or can be induced. If the AI is programmed for reinforcement learning, goals can be implicitly induced by rewarding some types of behavior and punishing others.a Alternatively, an evolutionary system can induce goals by using a fitness function to mutate and preferentially replicate highscoring AI systems; this is similar to how animals evolved to innately desire certain goals such as finding food, or how dogs can be bred via artificial selection to possess desired traits.54 Some AI systems, such as nearestneighbor, instead reason by analogy; these systems are not generally given goals, except to the degree that goals are somehow implicit in their training data.55 Such systems can still be benchmarked if the nongoal system is framed as a system whose goal is to successfully accomplish its narrow classification task.56

AI often revolves around the use of algorithms. An algorithm is a set of unambiguous instructions that a mechanical computer can execute.b A complex algorithm is often built on top of other, simpler, algorithms. A simple example of an algorithm is the following recipe for optimal play at tictactoe:57

If someone has a threat that is, two in a row, take the remaining square. Otherwise,
if a move forks to create two threats at once, play that move. Otherwise,
take the center square if it is free. Otherwise,
if your opponent has played in a corner, take the opposite corner. Otherwise,
take an empty corner if one exists. Otherwise,
take any empty square.
Many AI algorithms are capable of learning from data; they can enhance themselves by learning new heuristics strategies, or rules of thumb, that have worked well in the past, or can themselves write other algorithms. Some of the learners described below, including Bayesian networks, decision trees, and nearestneighbor, could theoretically, if given infinite data, time, and memory, learn to approximate any function, including whatever combination of mathematical functions would best describe the entire world. These learners could therefore, in theory, derive all possible knowledge, by considering every possible hypothesis and matching it against the data. In practice, it is almost never possible to consider every possibility, because of the phenomenon of combinatorial explosion, where the amount of time needed to solve a problem grows exponentially. Much of AI research involves figuring out how to identify and avoid considering broad swaths of possibilities that are unlikely to be fruitful.5859 For example, when viewing a map and looking for the shortest driving route from Denver to New York in the East, one can in most cases skip looking at any path through San Francisco or other areas far to the West; thus, an AI wielding an pathfinding algorithm like A can avoid the combinatorial explosion that would ensue if every possible route had to be ponderously considered in turn.60

The earliest and easiest to understand approach to AI was symbolism such as formal logic: If an otherwise healthy adult has a fever, then they may have influenza. A second, more general, approach is Bayesian inference: If the current patient has a fever, adjust the probability they have influenza in suchandsuch way. The third major approach, extremely popular in routine business AI applications, are analogizers such as SVM and nearestneighbor: After examining the records of known past patients whose temperature, symptoms, age, and other factors mostly match the current patient, X of those patients turned out to have influenza. A fourth approach is harder to intuitively understand, but is inspired by how the brains machinery works: the artificial neural network approach uses artificial neurons that can learn by comparing itself to the desired output and altering the strengths of the connections between its internal neurons to reinforce connections that seemed to be useful. These four main approaches can overlap with each other and with evolutionary systems; for example, neural nets can learn to make inferences, to generalize, and to make analogies. Some systems implicitly or explicitly use multiple of these approaches, alongside many other AI and nonAI algorithms;61 the best approach is often different depending on the problem.6263


The blue line could be an example of overfitting a linear function due to random noise.
Learning algorithms work on the basis that strategies, algorithms, and inferences that worked well in the past are likely to continue working well in the future. These inferences can be obvious, such as since the sun rose every morning for the last 10,000 days, it will probably rise tomorrow morning as well. They can be nuanced, such as X of families have geographically separate species with color variants, so there is an Y chance that undiscovered black swans exist. Learners also work on the basis of Occams razor: The simplest theory that explains the data is the likeliest. Therefore, to be successful, a learner must be designed such that it prefers simpler theories to complex theories, except in cases where the complex theory is proven substantially better. Settling on a bad, overly complex theory gerrymandered to fit all the past training data is known as overfitting. Many systems attempt to reduce overfitting by rewarding a theory in accordance with how well it fits the data, but penalizing the theory in accordance with how complex the theory is.64 Besides classic overfitting, learners can also disappoint by learning the wrong lesson. A toy example is that an image classifier trained only on pictures of brown horses and black cats might conclude that all brown patches are likely to be horses.65 A realworld example is that, unlike humans, current image classifiers dont determine the spatial relationship between components of the picture; instead, they learn abstract patterns of pixels that humans are oblivious to, but that linearly correlate with images of certain types of real objects. Faintly superimposing such a pattern on a legitimate image results in an adversarial image that the system misclassifies.c666768


A selfdriving car system may use a neural network to determine which parts of the picture seem to match previous training images of pedestrians, and then model those areas as slowmoving but somewhat unpredictable rectangular prisms that must be avoided.6970
Compared with humans, existing AI lacks several features of human commonsense reasoning; most notably, humans have powerful mechanisms for reasoning about nave physics such as space, time, and physical interactions. This enables even young children to easily make inferences like If I roll this pen off a table, it will fall on the floor. Humans also have a powerful mechanism of folk psychology that helps them to interpret naturallanguage sentences such as The city councilmen refused the demonstrators a permit because they advocated violence. A generic AI has difficulty inferring whether the councilmen or the demonstrators are the ones alleged to be advocating violence.717273 This lack of common knowledge means that AI often makes different mistakes than humans make, in ways that can seem incomprehensible. For example, existing selfdriving cars cannot reason about the location nor the intentions of pedestrians in the exact way that humans do, and instead must use nonhuman modes of reasoning to avoid accidents.747576

Problems
The overall research goal of artificial intelligence is to create technology that allows computers and machines to function in an intelligent manner. The general problem of simulating or creating intelligence has been broken down into subproblems. These consist of particular traits or capabilities that researchers expect an intelligent system to display. The traits described below have received the most attention.13

Reasoning, problem solving
Early researchers developed algorithms that imitated stepbystep reasoning that humans use when they solve puzzles or make logical deductions.77 By the late 1980s and 1990s, AI research had developed methods for dealing with uncertain or incomplete information, employing concepts from probability and economics.78

These algorithms proved to be insufficient for solving large reasoning problems, because they experienced a combinatorial explosion: they became exponentially slower as the problems grew larger.58 In fact, even humans rarely use the stepbystep deduction that early AI research was able to model. They solve most of their problems using fast, intuitive judgements.79

Knowledge representation

An ontology represents knowledge as a set of concepts within a domain and the relationships between those concepts.
Main articles: Knowledge representation and Commonsense knowledge
Knowledge representation80 and knowledge engineering81 are central to classical AI research. Some expert systems attempt to gather together explicit knowledge possessed by experts in some narrow domain. In addition, some projects attempt to gather the commonsense knowledge known to the average person into a database containing extensive knowledge about the world. Among the things a comprehensive commonsense knowledge base would contain are: objects, properties, categories and relations between objects;82 situations, events, states and time;83 causes and effects;84 knowledge about knowledge what we know about what other people know;85 and many other, less well researched domains. A representation of what exists is an ontology: the set of objects, relations, concepts, and properties formally described so that software agents can interpret them. The semantics of these are captured as description logic concepts, roles, and individuals, and typically implemented as classes, properties, and individuals in the Web Ontology Language.86 The most general ontologies are called upper ontologies, which attempt to provide a foundation for all other knowledge87 by acting as mediators between domain ontologies that cover specific knowledge about a particular knowledge domain field of interest or area of concern. Such formal knowledge representations can be used in contentbased indexing and retrieval,88 scene interpretation,89 clinical decision support,90 knowledge discovery mining interesting and actionable inferences from large databases,91 and other areas.92

Among the most difficult problems in knowledge representation are:

Default reasoning and the qualification problem
Many of the things people know take the form of working assumptions. For example, if a bird comes up in conversation, people typically picture an animal that is fist sized, sings, and flies. None of these things are true about all birds. John McCarthy identified this problem in 196993 as the qualification problem: for any commonsense rule that AI researchers care to represent, there tend to be a huge number of exceptions. Almost nothing is simply true or false in the way that abstract logic requires. AI research has explored a number of solutions to this problem.94
The breadth of commonsense knowledge
The number of atomic facts that the average person knows is very large. Research projects that attempt to build a complete knowledge base of commonsense knowledge e.g., Cyc require enormous amounts of laborious ontological engineeringthey must be built, by hand, one complicated concept at a time.95
The subsymbolic form of some commonsense knowledge
Much of what people know is not represented as facts or statements that they could express verbally. For example, a chess master will avoid a particular chess position because it feels too exposed96 or an art critic can take one look at a statue and realize that it is a fake.97 These are nonconscious and subsymbolic intuitions or tendencies in the human brain.98 Knowledge like this informs, supports and provides a context for symbolic, conscious knowledge. As with the related problem of subsymbolic reasoning, it is hoped that situated AI, computational intelligence, or statistical AI will provide ways to represent this kind of knowledge.98
Planning

A hierarchical control system is a form of control system in which a set of devices and governing software is arranged in a hierarchy.
Main article: Automated planning and scheduling
Intelligent agents must be able to set goals and achieve them.99 They need a way to visualize the futurea representation of the state of the world and be able to make predictions about how their actions will change itand be able to make choices that maximize the utility or value of available choices.100

In classical planning problems, the agent can assume that it is the only system acting in the world, allowing the agent to be certain of the consequences of its actions.101 However, if the agent is not the only actor, then it requires that the agent can reason under uncertainty. This calls for an agent that can not only assess its environment and make predictions, but also evaluate its predictions and adapt based on its assessment.102

Multiagent planning uses the cooperation and competition of many agents to achieve a given goal. Emergent behavior such as this is used by evolutionary algorithms and swarm intelligence.103

Learning
Main article: Machine learning
Machine learning, a fundamental concept of AI research since the fields inception,104 is the study of computer algorithms that improve automatically through experience.105106

Unsupervised learning is the ability to find patterns in a stream of input, without requiring a human to label the inputs first.107 Supervised learning includes both classification and numerical regression, which requires a human to label the input data first. Classification is used to determine what category something belongs in, after seeing a number of examples of things from several categories. Regression is the attempt to produce a function that describes the relationship between inputs and outputs and predicts how the outputs should change as the inputs change.106 Both classifiers and regression learners can be viewed as function approximators trying to learn an unknown possibly implicit function; for example, a spam classifier can be viewed as learning a function that maps from the text of an email to one of two categories, spam or not spam. Computational learning theory can assess learners by computational complexity, by sample complexity how much data is required, or by other notions of optimization.108 In reinforcement learning109 the agent is rewarded for good responses and punished for bad ones. The agent uses this sequence of rewards and punishments to form a strategy for operating in its problem space.

Natural language processing

A parse tree represents the syntactic structure of a sentence according to some formal grammar.
Main article: Natural language processing
Natural language processing110 NLP gives machines the ability to read and understand human language. A sufficiently powerful natural language processing system would enable naturallanguage user interfaces and the acquisition of knowledge directly from humanwritten sources, such as newswire texts. Some straightforward applications of natural language processing include information retrieval, text mining, question answering111 and machine translation.112 Many current approaches use word cooccurrence frequencies to construct syntactic representations of text. Keyword spotting strategies for search are popular and scalable but dumb; a search query for dog might only match documents with the literal word dog and miss a document with the word poodle. Lexical affinity strategies use the occurrence of words such as accident to assess the sentiment of a document. Modern statistical NLP approaches can combine all these strategies as well as others, and often achieve acceptable accuracy at the page or paragraph level, but continue to lack the semantic understanding required to classify isolated sentences well. Besides the usual difficulties with encoding semantic commonsense knowledge, existing semantic NLP sometimes scales too poorly to be viable in business applications. Beyond semantic NLP, the ultimate goal of narrative NLP is to embody a full understanding of commonsense reasoning.113

Perception
Main articles: Machine perception, Computer vision, and Speech recognition

Feature detection pictured: edge detection helps AI compose informative abstract structures out of raw data.
Machine perception114 is the ability to use input from sensors such as cameras visible spectrum or infrared, microphones, wireless signals, and active lidar, sonar, radar, and tactile sensors to deduce aspects of the world. Applications include speech recognition,115 facial recognition, and object recognition.116 Computer vision is the ability to analyze visual input. Such input is usually ambiguous; a giant, fiftymetertall pedestrian far away may produce exactly the same pixels as a nearby normalsized pedestrian, requiring the AI to judge the relative likelihood and reasonableness of different interpretations, for example by using its object model to assess that fiftymeter pedestrians do not exist.117

Motion and manipulation
Main article: Robotics
AI is heavily used in robotics.118 Advanced robotic arms and other industrial robots, widely used in modern factories, can learn from experience how to move efficiently despite the presence of friction and gear slippage.119 A modern mobile robot, when given a small, static, and visible environment, can easily determine its location and map its environment; however, dynamic environments, such as in endoscopy the interior of a patients breathing body, pose a greater challenge. Motion planning is the process of breaking down a movement task into primitives such as individual joint movements. Such movement often involves compliant motion, a process where movement requires maintaining physical contact with an object.120121122 Moravecs paradox generalizes that lowlevel sensorimotor skills that humans take for granted are, counterintuitively, difficult to program into a robot; the paradox is named after Hans Moravec, who stated in 1988 that it is comparatively easy to make computers exhibit adult level performance on intelligence tests or playing checkers, and difficult or impossible to give them the skills of a oneyearold when it comes to perception and mobility.123124 This is attributed to the fact that, unlike checkers, physical dexterity has been a direct target of natural selection for millions of years.125

Social intelligence
Main article: Affective computing

Kismet, a robot with rudimentary social skills126
Moravecs paradox can be extended to many forms of social intelligence.127128 Distributed multiagent coordination of autonomous vehicles remains a difficult problem.129 Affective computing is an interdisciplinary umbrella that comprises systems which recognize, interpret, process, or simulate human affects.130131132 Moderate successes related to affective computing include textual sentiment analysis and, more recently, multimodal affect analysis see multimodal sentiment analysis, wherein AI classifies the affects displayed by a videotaped subject.133

In the long run, social skills and an understanding of human emotion and game theory would be valuable to a social agent. Being able to predict the actions of others by understanding their motives and emotional states would allow an agent to make better decisions. Some computer systems mimic human emotion and expressions to appear more sensitive to the emotional dynamics of human interaction, or to otherwise facilitate humancomputer interaction.134 Similarly, some virtual assistants are programmed to speak conversationally or even to banter humorously; this tends to give nave users an unrealistic conception of how intelligent existing computer agents actually are.135

General intelligence
Main articles: Artificial general intelligence and AIcomplete
Historically, projects such as the Cyc knowledge base 1984 and the massive Japanese Fifth Generation Computer Systems initiative 19821992 attempted to cover the breadth of human cognition. These early projects failed to escape the limitations of nonquantitative symbolic logic models and, in retrospect, greatly underestimated the difficulty of crossdomain AI. Nowadays, the vast majority of current AI researchers work instead on tractable narrow AI applications such as medical diagnosis or automobile navigation.136 Many researchers predict that such narrow AI work in different individual domains will eventually be incorporated into a machine with artificial general intelligence AGI, combining most of the narrow skills mentioned in this article and at some point even exceeding human ability in most or all these areas.17137 Many advances have general, crossdomain significance. One highprofile example is that DeepMind in the 2010s developed a generalized artificial intelligence that could learn many diverse Atari games on its own, and later developed a variant of the system which succeeds at sequential learning.138139140 Besides transfer learning,141 hypothetical AGI breakthroughs could include the development of reflective architectures that can engage in decisiontheoretic metareasoning, and figuring out how to slurp up a comprehensive knowledge base from the entire unstructured Web.5 Some argue that some kind of currentlyundiscovered conceptually straightforward, but mathematically difficult, Master Algorithm could lead to AGI.142 Finally, a few emergent approaches look to simulating human intelligence extremely closely, and believe that anthropomorphic features like an artificial brain or simulated child development may someday reach a critical point where general intelligence emerges.143144

Many of the problems in this article may also require general intelligence, if machines are to solve the problems as well as people do. For example, even specific straightforward tasks, like machine translation, require that a machine read and write in both languages NLP, follow the authors argument reason, know what is being talked about knowledge, and faithfully reproduce the authors original intent social intelligence. A problem like machine translation is considered AIcomplete, because all of these problems need to be solved simultaneously in order to reach humanlevel machine performance.

Approaches
There is no established unifying theory or paradigm that guides AI research. Researchers disagree about many issues.145 A few of the most long standing questions that have remained unanswered are these: should artificial intelligence simulate natural intelligence by studying psychology or neurobiology? Or is human biology as irrelevant to AI research as bird biology is to aeronautical engineering?14 Can intelligent behavior be described using simple, elegant principles such as logic or optimization? Or does it necessarily require solving a large number of completely unrelated problems?15

Cybernetics and brain simulation
Main articles: Cybernetics and Computational neuroscience
In the 1940s and 1950s, a number of researchers explored the connection between neurobiology, information theory, and cybernetics. Some of them built machines that used electronic networks to exhibit rudimentary intelligence, such as W. Grey Walters turtles and the Johns Hopkins Beast. Many of these researchers gathered for meetings of the Teleological Society at Princeton University and the Ratio Club in England.146 By 1960, this approach was largely abandoned, although elements of it would be revived in the 1980s.

Symbolic
Main article: Symbolic AI
When access to digital computers became possible in the middle 1950s, AI research began to explore the possibility that human intelligence could be reduced to symbol manipulation. The research was centered in three institutions: Carnegie Mellon University, Stanford and MIT, and as described below, each one developed its own style of research. John Haugeland named these symbolic approaches to AI good old fashioned AI or GOFAI.147 During the 1960s, symbolic approaches had achieved great success at simulating highlevel thinking in small demonstration programs. Approaches based on cybernetics or artificial neural networks were abandoned or pushed into the background.148 Researchers in the 1960s and the 1970s were convinced that symbolic approaches would eventually succeed in creating a machine with artificial general intelligence and considered this the goal of their field.

Cognitive simulation
Economist Herbert Simon and Allen Newell studied human problemsolving skills and attempted to formalize them, and their work laid the foundations of the field of artificial intelligence, as well as cognitive science, operations research and management science. Their research team used the results of psychological experiments to develop programs that simulated the techniques that people used to solve problems. This tradition, centered at Carnegie Mellon University would eventually culminate in the development of the Soar architecture in the middle 1980s.149150

Logicbased
Unlike Simon and Newell, John McCarthy felt that machines did not need to simulate human thought, but should instead try to find the essence of abstract reasoning and problemsolving, regardless of whether people used the same algorithms.14 His laboratory at Stanford SAIL focused on using formal logic to solve a wide variety of problems, including knowledge representation, planning and learning.151 Logic was also the focus of the work at the University of Edinburgh and elsewhere in Europe which led to the development of the programming language Prolog and the science of logic programming.152

Antilogic or scruffy
Researchers at MIT such as Marvin Minsky and Seymour Papert153 found that solving difficult problems in vision and natural language processing required adhoc solutions  they argued that there was no simple and general principle like logic that would capture all the aspects of intelligent behavior. Roger Schank described their antilogic approaches as scruffy as opposed to the neat paradigms at CMU and Stanford.15 Commonsense knowledge bases such as Doug Lenats Cyc are an example of scruffy AI, since they must be built by hand, one complicated concept at a time.154

Knowledgebased
When computers with large memories became available around 1970, researchers from all three traditions began to build knowledge into AI applications.155 This knowledge revolution led to the development and deployment of expert systems introduced by Edward Feigenbaum, the first truly successful form of AI software.38 Key component on system arhitecute for all expert systems is Knowledge base, which stores facts and rules that illustrates AI.156 The knowledge revolution was also driven by the realization that enormous amounts of knowledge would be required by many simple AI applications.

Subsymbolic
By the 1980s, progress in symbolic AI seemed to stall and many believed that symbolic systems would never be able to imitate all the processes of human cognition, especially perception, robotics, learning and pattern recognition. A number of researchers began to look into subsymbolic approaches to specific AI problems.16 Subsymbolic methods manage to approach intelligence without specific representations of knowledge.

Embodied intelligence
This includes embodied, situated, behaviorbased, and nouvelle AI. Researchers from the related field of robotics, such as Rodney Brooks, rejected symbolic AI and focused on the basic engineering problems that would allow robots to move and survive.157 Their work revived the nonsymbolic viewpoint of the early cybernetics researchers of the 1950s and reintroduced the use of control theory in AI. This coincided with the development of the embodied mind thesis in the related field of cognitive science: the idea that aspects of the body such as movement, perception and visualization are required for higher intelligence.

Within developmental robotics, developmental learning approaches are elaborated upon to allow robots to accumulate repertoires of novel skills through autonomous selfexploration, social interaction with human teachers, and the use of guidance mechanisms active learning, maturation, motor synergies, etc..158159160161

Computational intelligence and soft computing
Interest in neural networks and connectionism was revived by David Rumelhart and others in the middle of the 1980s.162 Artificial neural networks are an example of soft computing  they are solutions to problems which cannot be solved with complete logical certainty, and where an approximate solution is often sufficient. Other soft computing approaches to AI include fuzzy systems, evolutionary computation and many statistical tools. The application of soft computing to AI is studied collectively by the emerging discipline of computational intelligence.163

Statistical learning
Much of traditional GOFAI got bogged down on ad hoc patches to symbolic computation that worked on their own toy models but failed to generalize to realworld results. However, around the 1990s, AI researchers adopted sophisticated mathematical tools, such as hidden Markov models HMM, information theory, and normative Bayesian decision theory to compare or to unify competing architectures. The shared mathematical language permitted a high level of collaboration with more established fields like mathematics, economics or operations research.d Compared with GOFAI, new statistical learning techniques such as HMM and neural networks were gaining higher levels of accuracy in many practical domains such as data mining, without necessarily acquiring semantic understanding of the datasets. The increased successes with realworld data led to increasing emphasis on comparing different approaches against shared test data to see which approach performed best in a broader context than that provided by idiosyncratic toy models; AI research was becoming more scientific. Nowadays results of experiments are often rigorously measurable, and are sometimes with difficulty reproducible.39164 Different statistical learning techniques have different limitations; for example, basic HMM cannot model the infinite possible combinations of natural language.165 Critics note that the shift from GOFAI to statistical learning is often also a shift away from Explainable AI. In AGI research, some scholars caution against overreliance on statistical learning, and argue that continuing research into GOFAI will still be necessary to attain general intelligence.166167

Integrating the approaches
Intelligent agent paradigm
An intelligent agent is a system that perceives its environment and takes actions which maximize its chances of success. The simplest intelligent agents are programs that solve specific problems. More complicated agents include human beings and organizations of human beings such as firms. The paradigm allows researchers to directly compare or even combine different approaches to isolated problems, by asking which agent is best at maximizing a given goal function. An agent that solves a specific problem can use any approach that works  some agents are symbolic and logical, some are subsymbolic artificial neural networks and others may use new approaches. The paradigm also gives researchers a common language to communicate with other fieldssuch as decision theory and economicsthat also use concepts of abstract agents. Building a complete agent requires researchers to address realistic problems of integration; for example, because sensory systems give uncertain information about the environment, planning systems must be able to function in the presence of uncertainty. The intelligent agent paradigm became widely accepted during the 1990s.168
Agent architectures and cognitive architectures
Researchers have designed systems to build intelligent systems out of interacting intelligent agents in a multiagent system.169 A hierarchical control system provides a bridge between subsymbolic AI at its lowest, reactive levels and traditional symbolic AI at its highest levels, where relaxed time constraints permit planning and world modelling.170 Some cognitive architectures are custombuilt to solve a narrow problem; others, such as Soar, are designed to mimic human cognition and to provide insight into general intelligence. Modern extensions of Soar are hybrid intelligent systems that include both symbolic and subsymbolic components.171172
Tools
AI has developed a large number of tools to solve the most difficult problems in computer science. A few of the most general of these methods are discussed below.

Search and optimization
Main articles: Search algorithm, Mathematical optimization, and Evolutionary computation
Many problems in AI can be solved in theory by intelligently searching through many possible solutions:173 Reasoning can be reduced to performing a search. For example, logical proof can be viewed as searching for a path that leads from premises to conclusions, where each step is the application of an inference rule.174 Planning algorithms search through trees of goals and subgoals, attempting to find a path to a target goal, a process called meansends analysis.175 Robotics algorithms for moving limbs and grasping objects use local searches in configuration space.119 Many learning algorithms use search algorithms based on optimization.

Simple exhaustive searches176 are rarely sufficient for most realworld problems: the search space the number of places to search quickly grows to astronomical numbers. The result is a search that is too slow or never completes. The solution, for many problems, is to use heuristics or rules of thumb that prioritize choices in favor of those that are more likely to reach a goal and to do so in a shorter number of steps. In some search methodologies heuristics can also serve to entirely eliminate some choices that are unlikely to lead to a goal called pruning the search tree. Heuristics supply the program with a best guess for the path on which the solution lies.177 Heuristics limit the search for solutions into a smaller sample size.120

A very different kind of search came to prominence in the 1990s, based on the mathematical theory of optimization. For many problems, it is possible to begin the search with some form of a guess and then refine the guess incrementally until no more refinements can be made. These algorithms can be visualized as blind hill climbing: we begin the search at a random point on the landscape, and then, by jumps or steps, we keep moving our guess uphill, until we reach the top. Other optimization algorithms are simulated annealing, beam search and random optimization.178


A particle swarm seeking the global minimum
Evolutionary computation uses a form of optimization search. For example, they may begin with a population of organisms the guesses and then allow them to mutate and recombine, selecting only the fittest to survive each generation refining the guesses. Classic evolutionary algorithms include genetic algorithms, gene expression programming, and genetic programming.179 Alternatively, distributed search processes can coordinate via swarm intelligence algorithms. Two popular swarm algorithms used in search are particle swarm optimization inspired by bird flocking and ant colony optimization inspired by ant trails.180181

Logic
Main articles: Logic programming and Automated reasoning
Logic182 is used for knowledge representation and problem solving, but it can be applied to other problems as well. For example, the satplan algorithm uses logic for planning183 and inductive logic programming is a method for learning.184

Several different forms of logic are used in AI research. Propositional logic185 involves truth functions such as or and not. Firstorder logic186 adds quantifiers and predicates, and can express facts about objects, their properties, and their relations with each other. Fuzzy set theory assigns a degree of truth between 0 and 1 to vague statements such as Alice is old or rich, or tall, or hungry that are too linguistically imprecise to be completely true or false. Fuzzy logic is successfully used in control systems to allow experts to contribute vague rules such as if you are close to the destination station and moving fast, increase the trains brake pressure; these vague rules can then be numerically refined within the system. Fuzzy logic fails to scale well in knowledge bases; many AI researchers question the validity of chaining fuzzylogic inferences.e188189

Default logics, nonmonotonic logics and circumscription94 are forms of logic designed to help with default reasoning and the qualification problem. Several extensions of logic have been designed to handle specific domains of knowledge, such as: description logics;82 situation calculus, event calculus and fluent calculus for representing events and time;83 causal calculus;84 belief calculus;190 and modal logics.85

Overall, qualitiative symbolic logic is brittle and scales poorly in the presence of noise or other uncertainty. Exceptions to rules are numerous, and it is difficult for logical systems to function in the presence of contradictory rules.191192

Probabilistic methods for uncertain reasoning
Main articles: Bayesian network, Hidden Markov model, Kalman filter, Particle filter, Decision theory, and Utility theory

Expectationmaximization clustering of Old Faithful eruption data starts from a random guess but then successfully converges on an accurate clustering of the two physically distinct modes of eruption.
Many problems in AI in reasoning, planning, learning, perception, and robotics require the agent to operate with incomplete or uncertain information. AI researchers have devised a number of powerful tools to solve these problems using methods from probability theory and economics.193

Bayesian networks194 are a very general tool that can be used for a large number of problems: reasoning using the Bayesian inference algorithm,195 learning using the expectationmaximization algorithm,f197 planning using decision networks198 and perception using dynamic Bayesian networks.199 Probabilistic algorithms can also be used for filtering, prediction, smoothing and finding explanations for streams of data, helping perception systems to analyze processes that occur over time e.g., hidden Markov models or Kalman filters.199 Compared with symbolic logic, formal Bayesian inference is computationally expensive. For inference to be tractable, most observations must be conditionally independent of one another. Complicated graphs with diamonds or other loops undirected cycles can require a sophisticated method such as Markov Chain Monte Carlo, which spreads an ensemble of random walkers throughout the Bayesian network and attempts to converge to an assessment of the conditional probabilities. Bayesian networks are used on Xbox Live to rate and match players; wins and losses are evidence of how good a player is. AdSense uses a Bayesian network with over 300 million edges to learn which ads to serve.191

A key concept from the science of economics is utility: a measure of how valuable something is to an intelligent agent. Precise mathematical tools have been developed that analyze how an agent can make choices and plan, using decision theory, decision analysis,200 and information value theory.100 These tools include models such as Markov decision processes,201 dynamic decision networks,199 game theory and mechanism design.202

Classifiers and statistical learning methods
Main articles: Classifier mathematics, Statistical classification, and Machine learning
The simplest AI applications can be divided into two types: classifiers if shiny then diamond and controllers if shiny then pick up. Controllers do, however, also classify conditions before inferring actions, and therefore classification forms a central part of many AI systems. Classifiers are functions that use pattern matching to determine a closest match. They can be tuned according to examples, making them very attractive for use in AI. These examples are known as observations or patterns. In supervised learning, each pattern belongs to a certain predefined class. A class can be seen as a decision that has to be made. All the observations combined with their class labels are known as a data set. When a new observation is received, that observation is classified based on previous experience.203

A classifier can be trained in various ways; there are many statistical and machine learning approaches. The decision tree204 is perhaps the most widely used machine learning algorithm.205 Other widely used classifiers are the neural network,206 knearest neighbor algorithm,g208 kernel methods such as the support vector machine SVM,h210 Gaussian mixture model,211 and the extremely popular naive Bayes classifier.i213 Classifier performance depends greatly on the characteristics of the data to be classified, such as the dataset size, the dimensionality, and the level of noise. Modelbased classifiers perform well if the assumed model is an extremely good fit for the actual data. Otherwise, if no matching model is available, and if accuracy rather than speed or scalability is the sole concern, conventional wisdom is that discriminative classifiers especially SVM tend to be more accurate than modelbased classifiers such as naive Bayes on most practical data sets.214215

Artificial neural networks
Main articles: Artificial neural network and Connectionism

A neural network is an interconnected group of nodes, akin to the vast network of neurons in the human brain.
Neural networks, or neural nets, were inspired by the architecture of neurons in the human brain. A simple neuron N accepts input from multiple other neurons, each of which, when activated or fired, cast a weighted vote for or against whether neuron N should itself activate. Learning requires an algorithm to adjust these weights based on the training data; one simple algorithm dubbed fire together, wire together is to increase the weight between two connected neurons when the activation of one triggers the successful activation of another. The net forms concepts that are distributed among a subnetwork of sharedj neurons that tend to fire together; a concept meaning leg might be coupled with a subnetwork meaning foot that includes the sound for foot. Neurons have a continuous spectrum of activation; in addition, neurons can process inputs in a nonlinear way rather than weighing straightforward votes. Modern neural nets can learn both continuous functions and, surprisingly, digital logical operations. Neural networks early successes included predicting the stock market and in 1995 a mostly selfdriving car.k216 In the 2010s, advances in neural networks using deep learning thrust AI into widespread public consciousness and contributed to an enormous upshift in corporate AI spending; for example, AIrelated MA in 2017 was over 25 times as large as in 2015.217218

The study of nonlearning artificial neural networks206 began in the decade before the field of AI research was founded, in the work of Walter Pitts and Warren McCullouch. Frank Rosenblatt invented the perceptron, a learning network with a single layer, similar to the old concept of linear regression. Early pioneers also include Alexey Grigorevich Ivakhnenko, Teuvo Kohonen, Stephen Grossberg, Kunihiko Fukushima, Christoph von der Malsburg, David Willshaw, ShunIchi Amari, Bernard Widrow, John Hopfield, Eduardo R. Caianiello, and others.

The main categories of networks are acyclic or feedforward neural networks where the signal passes in only one direction and recurrent neural networks which allow feedback and shortterm memories of previous input events. Among the most popular feedforward networks are perceptrons, multilayer perceptrons and radial basis networks.219 Neural networks can be applied to the problem of intelligent control for robotics or learning, using such techniques as Hebbian learning fire together, wire together, GMDH or competitive learning.220

Today, neural networks are often trained by the backpropagation algorithm, which had been around since 1970 as the reverse mode of automatic differentiation published by Seppo Linnainmaa,221222 and was introduced to neural networks by Paul Werbos.223224225

Hierarchical temporal memory is an approach that models some of the structural and algorithmic properties of the neocortex.226

In short, most neural networks use some form of gradient descent on a handcreated neural topology. However, some research groups, such as Uber, argue that simple neuroevolution to mutate new neural network topologies and weights may be competitive with sophisticated gradient descent approaches. One advantage of neuroevolution is that it may be less prone to get caught in dead ends.227

Deep feedforward neural networks
Main article: Deep learning
Deep learning is any artificial neural network that can learn a long chain of causal links. For example, a feedforward network with six hidden layers can learn a sevenlink causal chain six hidden layers  output layer and has a credit assignment path CAP depth of seven. Many deep learning systems need to be able to learn chains ten or more causal links in length.228 Deep learning has transformed many important subfields of artificial intelligence, including computer vision, speech recognition, natural language processing and others.229230228

According to one overview,231 the expression Deep Learning was introduced to the Machine Learning community by Rina Dechter in 1986232 and gained traction after Igor Aizenberg and colleagues introduced it to Artificial Neural Networks in 2000.233 The first functional Deep Learning networks were published by Alexey Grigorevich Ivakhnenko and V. G. Lapa in 1965.234page needed These networks are trained one layer at a time. Ivakhnenkos 1971 paper235 describes the learning of a deep feedforward multilayer perceptron with eight layers, already much deeper than many later networks. In 2006, a publication by Geoffrey Hinton and Ruslan Salakhutdinov introduced another way of pretraining manylayered feedforward neural networks FNNs one layer at a time, treating each layer in turn as an unsupervised restricted Boltzmann machine, then using supervised backpropagation for finetuning.236 Similar to shallow artificial neural networks, deep neural networks can model complex nonlinear relationships. Over the last few years, advances in both machine learning algorithms and computer hardware have led to more efficient methods for training deep neural networks that contain many layers of nonlinear hidden units and a very large output layer.237

Deep learning often uses convolutional neural networks CNNs, whose origins can be traced back to the Neocognitron introduced by Kunihiko Fukushima in 1980.238 In 1989, Yann LeCun and colleagues applied backpropagation to such an architecture. In the early 2000s, in an industrial application CNNs already processed an estimated 10 to 20 of all the checks written in the US.239 Since 2011, fast implementations of CNNs on GPUs have won many visual pattern recognition competitions.228

CNNs with 12 convolutional layers were used in conjunction with reinforcement learning by Deepminds AlphaGo Lee, the program that beat a top Go champion in 2016.240

Deep recurrent neural networks
Main article: Recurrent neural networks
Early on, deep learning was also applied to sequence learning with recurrent neural networks RNNs241 which are in theory Turing complete242 and can run arbitrary programs to process arbitrary sequences of inputs. The depth of an RNN is unlimited and depends on the length of its input sequence; thus, an RNN is an example of deep learning.228 RNNs can be trained by gradient descent243244245 but suffer from the vanishing gradient problem.229246 In 1992, it was shown that unsupervised pretraining of a stack of recurrent neural networks can speed up subsequent supervised learning of deep sequential problems.247

Numerous researchers now use variants of a deep learning recurrent NN called the long shortterm memory LSTM network published by Hochreiter  Schmidhuber in 1997.248 LSTM is often trained by Connectionist Temporal Classification CTC.249 At Google, Microsoft and Baidu this approach has revolutionised speech recognition.250251252 For example, in 2015, Googles speech recognition experienced a dramatic performance jump of 49 through CTCtrained LSTM, which is now available through Google Voice to billions of smartphone users.253 Google also used LSTM to improve machine translation,254 Language Modeling255 and Multilingual Language Processing.256 LSTM combined with CNNs also improved automatic image captioning257 and a plethora of other applications.

Evaluating progress
Further information: Progress in artificial intelligence and Competitions and prizes in artificial intelligence
AI, like electricity or the steam engine, is a general purpose technology. There is no consensus on how to characterize which tasks AI tends to excel at.258 While projects such as AlphaZero have succeeded in generating their own knowledge from scratch, many other machine learning projects require large training datasets.259260 Researcher Andrew Ng has suggested, as a highly imperfect rule of thumb, that almost anything a typical human can do with less than one second of mental thought, we can probably now or in the near future automate using AI.261 Moravecs paradox suggests that AI lags humans at many tasks that the human brain has specifically evolved to perform well.125

Games provide a wellpublicized benchmark for assessing rates of progress. AlphaGo around 2016 brought the era of classical boardgame benchmarks to a close. Games of imperfect knowledge provide new challenges to AI in the area of game theory.262263 Esports such as StarCraft continue to provide additional public benchmarks.264265 There are many competitions and prizes, such as the Imagenet Challenge, to promote research in artificial intelligence. The most common areas of competition include general machine intelligence, conversational behavior, datamining, robotic cars, and robot soccer as well as conventional games.266

The imitation game an interpretation of the 1950 Turing test that assesses whether a computer can imitate a human is nowadays considered too exploitable to be a meaningful benchmark.267 A derivative of the Turing test is the Completely Automated Public Turing test to tell Computers and Humans Apart CAPTCHA. As the name implies, this helps to determine that a user is an actual person and not a computer posing as a human. In contrast to the standard Turing test, CAPTCHA is administered by a machine and targeted to a human as opposed to being administered by a human and targeted to a machine. A computer asks a user to complete a simple test then generates a grade for that test. Computers are unable to solve the problem, so correct solutions are deemed to be the result of a person taking the test. A common type of CAPTCHA is the test that requires the typing of distorted letters, numbers or symbols that appear in an image undecipherable by a computer.268

Proposed universal intelligence tests aim to compare how well machines, humans, and even nonhuman animals perform on problem sets that are generic as possible. At an extreme, the test suite can contain every possible problem, weighted by Kolmogorov complexity; unfortunately, these problem sets tend to be dominated by impoverished patternmatching exercises where a tuned AI can easily exceed human performance levels.269270

Applications

An automated online assistant providing customer service on a web page  one of many very primitive applications of artificial intelligence
Main article: Applications of artificial intelligence
AI is relevant to any intellectual task.271 Modern artificial intelligence techniques are pervasive and are too numerous to list here. Frequently, when a technique reaches mainstream use, it is no longer considered artificial intelligence; this phenomenon is described as the AI effect.272

Highprofile examples of AI include autonomous vehicles such as drones and selfdriving cars, medical diagnosis, creating art such as poetry, proving mathematical theorems, playing games such as Chess or Go, search engines such as Google search, online assistants such as Siri, image recognition in photographs, spam filtering, prediction of judicial decisions273 and targeting online advertisements.271274275

With social media sites overtaking TV as a source for news for young people and news organisations increasingly reliant on social media platforms for generating distribution,276 major publishers now use artificial intelligence AI technology to post stories more effectively and generate higher volumes of traffic.277

Healthcare
Main article: Artificial intelligence in healthcare

A patientside surgical arm of Da Vinci Surgical System
AI is being applied to the high cost problem of dosage issueswhere findings suggested that AI could save 16 billion. In 2016, a ground breaking study in California found that a mathematical formula developed with the help of AI correctly determined the accurate dose of immunosuppressant drugs to give to organ patients.278


Xray of a hand, with automatic calculation of bone age by computer software
Artificial intelligence is breaking into the healthcare industry by assisting doctors. According to Bloomberg Technology, Microsoft has developed AI to help doctors find the right treatments for cancer.279 There is a great amount of research and drugs developed relating to cancer. In detail, there are more than 800 medicines and vaccines to treat cancer. This negatively affects the doctors, because there are too many options to choose from, making it more difficult to choose the right drugs for the patients. Microsoft is working on a project to develop a machine called Hanover. Its goal is to memorize all the papers necessary to cancer and help predict which combinations of drugs will be most effective for each patient. One project that is being worked on at the moment is fighting myeloid leukemia, a fatal cancer where the treatment has not improved in decades. Another study was reported to have found that artificial intelligence was as good as trained doctors in identifying skin cancers.280 Another study is using artificial intelligence to try and monitor multiple highrisk patients, and this is done by asking each patient numerous questions based on data acquired from live doctor to patient interactions.281

According to CNN, a recent study by surgeons at the Childrens National Medical Center in Washington successfully demonstrated surgery with an autonomous robot. The team supervised the robot while it performed softtissue surgery, stitching together a pigs bowel during open surgery, and doing so better than a human surgeon, the team claimed.282 IBM has created its own artificial intelligence computer, the IBM Watson, which has beaten human intelligence at some levels. Watson not only won at the game show Jeopardy! against former champions,283 but was declared a hero after successfully diagnosing a woman who was suffering from leukemia.284

Automotive
Main article: driverless cars
Advancements in AI have contributed to the growth of the automotive industry through the creation and evolution of selfdriving vehicles. As of 2016, there are over 30 companies utilizing AI into the creation of driverless cars. A few companies involved with AI include Tesla, Google, and Apple.285

Many components contribute to the functioning of selfdriving cars. These vehicles incorporate systems such as braking, lane changing, collision prevention, navigation and mapping. Together, these systems, as well as high performance computers, are integrated into one complex vehicle.286

Recent developments in autonomous automobiles have made the innovation of selfdriving trucks possible, though they are still in the testing phase. The UK government has passed legislation to begin testing of selfdriving truck platoons in 2018.287 Selfdriving truck platoons are a fleet of selfdriving trucks following the lead of one nonselfdriving truck, so the truck platoons arent entirely autonomous yet. Meanwhile, the Daimler, a German automobile corporation, is testing the Freightliner Inspiration which is a semiautonomous truck that will only be used on the highway.288

One main factor that influences the ability for a driverless automobile to function is mapping. In general, the vehicle would be preprogrammed with a map of the area being driven. This map would include data on the approximations of street light and curb heights in order for the vehicle to be aware of its surroundings. However, Google has been working on an algorithm with the purpose of eliminating the need for preprogrammed maps and instead, creating a device that would be able to adjust to a variety of new surroundings.289 Some selfdriving cars are not equipped with steering wheels or brake pedals, so there has also been research focused on creating an algorithm that is capable of maintaining a safe environment for the passengers in the vehicle through awareness of speed and driving conditions.290

Another factor that is influencing the ability for a driverless automobile is the safety of the passenger. To make a driverless automobile, engineers must program it to handle highrisk situations. These situations could include a headon collision with pedestrians. The cars main goal should be to make a decision that would avoid hitting the pedestrians and saving the passengers in the car. But there is a possibility the car would need to make a decision that would put someone in danger. In other words, the car would need to decide to save the pedestrians or the passengers.291 The programming of the car in these situations is crucial to a successful driverless automobile.

Finance and economics
Financial institutions have long used artificial neural network systems to detect charges or claims outside of the norm, flagging these for human investigation. The use of AI in banking can be traced back to 1987 when Security Pacific National Bank in US setup a Fraud Prevention Task force to counter the unauthorised use of debit cards. Programs like Kasisto and Moneystream are using AI in financial services.

Banks use artificial intelligence systems today to organize operations, maintain bookkeeping, invest in stocks, and manage properties. AI can react to changes overnight or when business is not taking place.292 In August 2001, robots beat humans in a simulated financial trading competition.293 AI has also reduced fraud and financial crimes by monitoring behavioral patterns of users for any abnormal changes or anomalies.294

The use of AI machines in the market in applications such as online trading and decision making has changed major economic theories.295 For example, AI based buying and selling platforms have changed the law of supply and demand in that it is now possible to easily estimate individualized demand and supply curves and thus individualized pricing. Furthermore, AI machines reduce information asymmetry in the market and thus making markets more efficient while reducing the volume of trades. Furthermore, AI in the markets limits the consequences of behavior in the markets again making markets more efficient. Other theories where AI has had impact include in rational choice, rational expectations, game theory, Lewis turning point, portfolio optimization and counterfactual thinking.

Video games
Main article: Artificial intelligence video games
In video games, artificial intelligence is routinely used to generate dynamic purposeful behavior in nonplayer characters NPCs. In addition, wellunderstood AI techniques are routinely used for pathfinding. Some researchers consider NPC AI in games to be a solved problem for most production tasks. Games with more atypical AI include the AI director of Left 4 Dead 2008 and the neuroevolutionary training of platoons in Supreme Commander 2 2010.296297

Military
Further information: Artificial intelligence arms race, Lethal autonomous weapon, and Unmanned combat aerial vehicle
Worldwide annual military spending on robotics rose from 5.1 billion USD in 2010 to 7.5 billion USD in 2015.298299 Military drones capable of autonomous action are widely considered a useful asset. In 2017, Vladimir Putin stated that Whoever becomes the leader in artificial intelligence will become the ruler of the world.300301 Many artificial intelligence researchers seek to distance themselves from military applications of AI.302

Audit
For financial statements audit, AI makes continuous audit possible. AI tools could analyze many sets of different information immediately. The potential benefit would be the overall audit risk will be reduced, the level of assurance will be increased and the time duration of audit will be reduced.303

Advertising
A report by the Guardian newspaper in the UK in 2018 found that online gambling companies were using AI to predict the behavior of customers in order to target them with personalized promotions.304 Developers of commercial AI platforms are also beginning to appeal more directly to casino operators, offering a range of existing and potential services to help them boost their profits and expand their customer base.305

Art
Artificial Intelligence has inspired numerous creative applications including its usage to produce visual art. The exhibition Thinking Machines: Art and Design in the Computer Age, 19591989 at MoMA 306 provides a good overview of the historical applications of AI for art, architecture, and design. Recent exhibitions showcasing the usage of AI to produce art include the Googlesponsored benefit and auction at the Gray Area Foundation in San Francisco, where artists experimented with the deepdream algorithm 307 and the exhibition Unhuman: Art in the Age of AI, which took place in Los Angeles and Frankfurt in the fall of 2017.308309 In the spring of 2018, the Association of Computing Machinery dedicated a special magazine issue to the subject of computers and art highlighting the role of machine learning in the arts.310

Philosophy and ethics
Main articles: Philosophy of artificial intelligence and Ethics of artificial intelligence
There are three philosophical questions related to AI:

Is artificial general intelligence possible? Can a machine solve any problem that a human being can solve using intelligence? Or are there hard limits to what a machine can accomplish?
Are intelligent machines dangerous? How can we ensure that machines behave ethically and that they are used ethically?
Can a machine have a mind, consciousness and mental states in exactly the same sense that human beings do? Can a machine be sentient, and thus deserve certain rights? Can a machine intentionally cause harm?
The limits of artificial general intelligence
Main articles: Philosophy of AI, Turing test, Physical symbol systems hypothesis, Dreyfus critique of AI, The Emperors New Mind, and AI effect
Can a machine be intelligent? Can it think?

Alan Turings polite convention
We need not decide if a machine can think; we need only decide if a machine can act as intelligently as a human being. This approach to the philosophical problems associated with artificial intelligence forms the basis of the Turing test.311
The Dartmouth proposal
Every aspect of learning or any other feature of intelligence can be so precisely described that a machine can be made to simulate it. This conjecture was printed in the proposal for the Dartmouth Conference of 1956, and represents the position of most working AI researchers.312
Newell and Simons physical symbol system hypothesis
A physical symbol system has the necessary and sufficient means of general intelligent action. Newell and Simon argue that intelligence consists of formal operations on symbols.313 Hubert Dreyfus argued that, on the contrary, human expertise depends on unconscious instinct rather than conscious symbol manipulation and on having a feel for the situation rather than explicit symbolic knowledge. See Dreyfus critique of AI.314315
Gdelian arguments
Gdel himself,316 John Lucas in 1961 and Roger Penrose in a more detailed argument from 1989 onwards made highly technical arguments that human mathematicians can consistently see the truth of their own Gdel statements and therefore have computational abilities beyond that of mechanical Turing machines.317 However, the modern consensus in the scientific and mathematical community is that these Gdelian arguments fail.318319320
The artificial brain argument
The brain can be simulated by machines and because brains are intelligent, simulated brains must also be intelligent; thus machines can be intelligent. Hans Moravec, Ray Kurzweil and others have argued that it is technologically feasible to copy the brain directly into hardware and software and that such a simulation will be essentially identical to the original.143
The AI effect
Machines are already intelligent, but observers have failed to recognize it. When Deep Blue beat Garry Kasparov in chess, the machine was acting intelligently. However, onlookers commonly discount the behavior of an artificial intelligence program by arguing that it is not real intelligence after all; thus real intelligence is whatever intelligent behavior people can do that machines still cannot. This is known as the AI Effect: AI is whatever hasnt been done yet.
Potential harm
Widespread use of artificial intelligence could have unintended consequences that are dangerous or undesirable. Scientists from the Future of Life Institute, among others, described some shortterm research goals to see how AI influences the economy, the laws and ethics that are involved with AI and how to minimize AI security risks. In the longterm, the scientists have proposed to continue optimizing function while minimizing possible security risks that come along with new technologies.321

Existential risk
Main article: Existential risk from artificial general intelligence
Physicist Stephen Hawking, Microsoft founder Bill Gates, and SpaceX founder Elon Musk have expressed concerns about the possibility that AI could evolve to the point that humans could not control it, with Hawking theorizing that this could spell the end of the human race. 322 323 324

The development of full artificial intelligence could spell the end of the human race. Once humans develop artificial intelligence, it will take off on its own and redesign itself at an everincreasing rate. Humans, who are limited by slow biological evolution, couldnt compete and would be superseded.

Stephen Hawking325
In his book Superintelligence, Nick Bostrom provides an argument that artificial intelligence will pose a threat to mankind. He argues that sufficiently intelligent AI, if it chooses actions based on achieving some goal, will exhibit convergent behavior such as acquiring resources or protecting itself from being shut down. If this AIs goals do not reflect humanitys  one example is an AI told to compute as many digits of pi as possible  it might harm humanity in order to acquire more resources or prevent itself from being shut down, ultimately to better achieve its goal.

Concern over risk from artificial intelligence has led to some highprofile donations and investments. A group of prominent tech titans including Peter Thiel, Amazon Web Services and Musk have committed 1billion to OpenAI a nonprofit company aimed at championing responsible AI development.326 The opinion of experts within the field of artificial intelligence is mixed, with sizable fractions both concerned and unconcerned by risk from eventual superhumanlycapable AI.327 In January 2015, Elon Musk donated ten million dollars to the Future of Life Institute to fund research on understanding AI decision making. The goal of the institute is to grow wisdom with which we manage the growing power of technology. Musk also funds companies developing artificial intelligence such as Google DeepMind and Vicarious to just keep an eye on whats going on with artificial intelligence.328 I think there is potentially a dangerous outcome there.329330

For this danger to be realized, the hypothetical AI would have to overpower or outthink all of humanity, which a minority of experts argue is a possibility far enough in the future to not be worth researching.331332 Other counterarguments revolve around humans being either intrinsically or convergently valuable from the perspective of an artificial intelligence.333

Devaluation of humanity
Main article: Computer Power and Human Reason
Joseph Weizenbaum wrote that AI applications cannot, by definition, successfully simulate genuine human empathy and that the use of AI technology in fields such as customer service or psychotherapy334 was deeply misguided. Weizenbaum was also bothered that AI researchers and some philosophers were willing to view the human mind as nothing more than a computer program a position is now known as computationalism. To Weizenbaum these points suggest that AI research devalues human life.335

Decrease in demand for human labor
Further information: Technological unemployment  21st century
The relationship between automation and employment is complicated. While automation eliminates old jobs, it also creates new jobs through microeconomic and macroeconomic effects.336 Unlike previous waves of automation, many middleclass jobs may be eliminated by artificial intelligence; The Economist states that the worry that AI could do to whitecollar jobs what steam power did to bluecollar ones during the Industrial Revolution is worth taking seriously.337 Subjective estimates of the risk vary widely; for example, Michael Osborne and Carl Benedikt Frey estimate 47 of U.S. jobs are at high risk of potential automation, while an OECD report classifies only 9 of U.S. jobs as high risk.338339340 Jobs at extreme risk range from paralegals to fast food cooks, while job demand is likely to increase for carerelated professions ranging from personal healthcare to the clergy.341 Author Martin Ford and others go further and argue that a large number of jobs are routine, repetitive and to an AI predictable; Ford warns that these jobs may be automated in the next couple of decades, and that many of the new jobs may not be accessible to people with average capability, even with retraining. Economists point out that in the past technology has tended to increase rather than reduce total employment, but acknowledge that were in uncharted territory with AI.21

Autonomous weapons
See also: Lethal autonomous weapon
Currently, 50 countries are researching battlefield robots, including the United States, China, Russia, and the United Kingdom. Many people concerned about risk from superintelligent AI also want to limit the use of artificial soldiers and drones.342

Ethical machines
Machines with intelligence have the potential to use their intelligence to prevent harm and minimize the risks; they may have the ability to use ethical reasoning to better choose their actions in the world. Research in this area includes machine ethics, artificial moral agents, and friendly AI.

Artificial moral agents
Wendell Wallach introduced the concept of artificial moral agents AMA in his book Moral Machines343 For Wallach, AMAs have become a part of the research landscape of artificial intelligence as guided by its two central questions which he identifies as Does Humanity Want Computers Making Moral Decisions344 and Can Robots Really Be Moral.345 For Wallach the question is not centered on the issue of whether machines can demonstrate the equivalent of moral behavior in contrast to the constraints which society may place on the development of AMAs.346

Machine ethics
Main article: Machine ethics
The field of machine ethics is concerned with giving machines ethical principles, or a procedure for discovering a way to resolve the ethical dilemmas they might encounter, enabling them to function in an ethically responsible manner through their own ethical decision making.347 The field was delineated in the AAAI Fall 2005 Symposium on Machine Ethics: Past research concerning the relationship between technology and ethics has largely focused on responsible and irresponsible use of technology by human beings, with a few people being interested in how human beings ought to treat machines. In all cases, only human beings have engaged in ethical reasoning. The time has come for adding an ethical dimension to at least some machines. Recognition of the ethical ramifications of behavior involving machines, as well as recent and potential developments in machine autonomy, necessitate this. In contrast to computer hacking, software property issues, privacy issues and other topics normally ascribed to computer ethics, machine ethics is concerned with the behavior of machines towards human users and other machines. Research in machine ethics is key to alleviating concerns with autonomous systemsit could be argued that the notion of autonomous machines without such a dimension is at the root of all fear concerning machine intelligence. Further, investigation of machine ethics could enable the discovery of problems with current ethical theories, advancing our thinking about Ethics.348 Machine ethics is sometimes referred to as machine morality, computational ethics or computational morality. A variety of perspectives of this nascent field can be found in the collected edition Machine Ethics347 that stems from the AAAI Fall 2005 Symposium on Machine Ethics.348

Malevolent and friendly AI
Main article: Friendly AI
Political scientist Charles T. Rubin believes that AI can be neither designed nor guaranteed to be benevolent.349 He argues that any sufficiently advanced benevolence may be indistinguishable from malevolence. Humans should not assume machines or robots would treat us favorably because there is no a priori reason to believe that they would be sympathetic to our system of morality, which has evolved along with our particular biology which AIs would not share. Hyperintelligent software may not necessarily decide to support the continued existence of humanity and would be extremely difficult to stop. This topic has also recently begun to be discussed in academic publications as a real source of risks to civilization, humans, and planet Earth.

One proposal to deal with this is to ensure that the first generally intelligent AI is Friendly AI, and will then be able to control subsequently developed AIs. Some question whether this kind of check could really remain in place.

Leading AI researcher Rodney Brooks writes, I think it is a mistake to be worrying about us developing malevolent AI anytime in the next few hundred years. I think the worry stems from a fundamental error in not distinguishing the difference between the very real recent advances in a particular aspect of AI, and the enormity and complexity of building sentient volitional intelligence.350

Machine consciousness, sentience and mind
Main article: Artificial consciousness
If an AI system replicates all key aspects of human intelligence, will that system also be sentient  will it have a mind which has conscious experiences? This question is closely related to the philosophical problem as to the nature of human consciousness, generally referred to as the hard problem of consciousness.

Consciousness
Main articles: Hard problem of consciousness and Theory of mind
David Chalmers identified two problems in understanding the mind, which he named the hard and easy problems of consciousness.351 The easy problem is understanding how the brain processes signals, makes plans and controls behavior. The hard problem is explaining how this feels or why it should feel like anything at all. Human information processing is easy to explain, however human subjective experience is difficult to explain.

For example, consider what happens when a person is shown a color swatch and identifies it, saying its red. The easy problem only requires understanding the machinery in the brain that makes it possible for a person to know that the color swatch is red. The hard problem is that people also know something else  they also know what red looks like. Consider that a person born blind can know that something is red without knowing what red looks like.l Everyone knows subjective experience exists, because they do it every day e.g., all sighted people know what red looks like. The hard problem is explaining how the brain creates it, why it exists, and how it is different than knowledge and other aspects of the brain.

Computationalism and functionalism
Main articles: Computationalism and Functionalism philosophy of mind
Computationalism is the position in the philosophy of mind that the human mind or the human brain or both is an information processing system and that thinking is a form of computing.352 Computationalism argues that the relationship between mind and body is similar or identical to the relationship between software and hardware and thus may be a solution to the mindbody problem. This philosophical position was inspired by the work of AI researchers and cognitive scientists in the 1960s and was originally proposed by philosophers Jerry Fodor and Hilary Putnam.

Strong AI hypothesis
Main article: Chinese room
The philosophical position that John Searle has named strong AI states: The appropriately programmed computer with the right inputs and outputs would thereby have a mind in exactly the same sense human beings have minds.353 Searle counters this assertion with his Chinese room argument, which asks us to look inside the computer and try to find where the mind might be.354

Robot rights
Main article: Robot rights
If a machine can be created that has intelligence, could it also feel? If it can feel, does it have the same rights as a human? This issue, now known as robot rights, is currently being considered by, for example, Californias Institute for the Future, although many critics believe that the discussion is premature.355 Some critics of transhumanism argue that any hypothetical robot rights would lie on a spectrum with animal rights and human rights.356 The subject is profoundly discussed in the 2010 documentary film Plug  Pray.357

Superintelligence
Main article: Superintelligence
Are there limits to how intelligent machines  or humanmachine hybrids  can be? A superintelligence, hyperintelligence, or superhuman intelligence is a hypothetical agent that would possess intelligence far surpassing that of the brightest and most gifted human mind. Superintelligence may also refer to the form or degree of intelligence possessed by such an agent.137

Technological singularity
Main articles: Technological singularity and Moores law
If research into Strong AI produced sufficiently intelligent software, it might be able to reprogram and improve itself. The improved software would be even better at improving itself, leading to recursive selfimprovement.358 The new intelligence could thus increase exponentially and dramatically surpass humans. Science fiction writer Vernor Vinge named this scenario singularity.359 Technological singularity is when accelerating progress in technologies will cause a runaway effect wherein artificial intelligence will exceed human intellectual capacity and control, thus radically changing or even ending civilization. Because the capabilities of such an intelligence may be impossible to comprehend, the technological singularity is an occurrence beyond which events are unpredictable or even unfathomable.359137

Ray Kurzweil has used Moores law which describes the relentless exponential improvement in digital technology to calculate that desktop computers will have the same processing power as human brains by the year 2029, and predicts that the singularity will occur in 2045.359

Transhumanism
Main article: Transhumanism
You awake one morning to find your brain has another lobe functioning. Invisible, this auxiliary lobe answers your questions with information beyond the realm of your own memory, suggests plausible courses of action, and asks questions that help bring out relevant facts. You quickly come to rely on the new lobe so much that you stop wondering how it works. You just use it. This is the dream of artificial intelligence.

Byte, April 1985360
Robot designer Hans Moravec, cyberneticist Kevin Warwick and inventor Ray Kurzweil have predicted that humans and machines will merge in the future into cyborgs that are more capable and powerful than either.361 This idea, called transhumanism, which has roots in Aldous Huxley and Robert Ettinger.

Edward Fredkin argues that artificial intelligence is the next stage in evolution, an idea first proposed by Samuel Butlers Darwin among the Machines 1863, and expanded upon by George Dyson in his book of the same name in 1998.362

In fiction
Main article: Artificial intelligence in fiction

The word robot itself was coined by Karel apek in his 1921 play R.U.R., the title standing for Rossums Universal Robots
Thoughtcapable artificial beings appeared as storytelling devices since antiquity,24 and have been a persistent theme in science fiction.

A common trope in these works began with Mary Shelleys Frankenstein, where a human creation becomes a threat to its masters. This includes such works as Arthur C. Clarkes and Stanley Kubricks 2001: A Space Odyssey both 1968, with HAL 9000, the murderous computer in charge of the Discovery One spaceship, as well as The Terminator 1984 and The Matrix 1999. In contrast, the rare loyal robots such as Gort from The Day the Earth Stood Still 1951 and Bishop from Aliens 1986 are less prominent in popular culture.363

Isaac Asimov introduce the Three Laws of Robotics in many books and stories, most notably the Multivac series about a superintelligent computer of the same name. Asimovs laws are often brought up during layman discussions of machine ethics;364 while almost all artificial intelligence researchers are familiar with Asimovs laws through popular culture, they generally consider the laws useless for many reasons, one of which is their ambiguity.365

Transhumanism the merging of humans and machines is explored in the manga Ghost in the Shell and the sciencefiction series Dune. In the 1980s, artist Hajime Sorayamas Sexy Robots series were painted and published in Japan depicting the actual organic human form with lifelike muscular metallic skins and later the Gynoids book followed that was used by or influenced movie makers including George Lucas and other creatives. Sorayama never considered these organic robots to be real part of nature but always unnatural product of the human mind, a fantasy existing in the mind even when realized in actual form.

Several works use AI to force us to confront the fundamental of question of what makes us human, showing us artificial beings that have the ability to feel, and thus to suffer. This appears in Karel apeks R.U.R., the films A.I. Artificial Intelligence and Ex Machina, as well as the novel Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?, by Philip K. Dick. Dick considers the idea that our understanding of human subjectivity is altered by technology created with artificial intelligence.366

See also
Animation2.gif Artificial intelligence portal
Abductive reasoning
Behavior selection algorithm
Business process automation
Casebased reasoning
Commonsense reasoning
Emergent algorithm
Evolutionary computation
Glossary of artificial intelligence
Machine learning
Mathematical optimization
Multiagent system
Robotic process automation
Soft computing
Weak AI
Explanatory notes
 The act of doling out rewards can itself be formalized or automated into a reward function.
 Terminology varies; see algorithm characterizations.
 Adversarial vulnerabilities can also result in nonlinear systems, or from nonpattern perturbations. Some systems are so brittle that changing a single adversarial pixel predictably induces misclassification.
 While such a victory of the neats may be a consequence of the field becoming more mature, AIMA states that in practice both neat and scruffy approaches continue to be necessary in AI research.
 There exist many different types of uncertainty, vagueness, and ignorance... We independently confirm the inadequacy of systems for reasoning about uncertainty that propagates numerical factors according to only to which connectives appear in assertions.187
 Expectationmaximization, one of the most popular algorithms in machine learning, allows clustering in the presence of unknown latent variables196
 The most widely used analogical AI until the mid1990s207
 SVM displaced knearest neighbor in the 1990s209
 Naive Bayes is reportedly the most widely used learner at Google, due in part to its scalability.212
 Each individual neuron is likely to participate in more than one concept.
 Steering for the 1995 No Hands Across America required only a few human assists.
 This is based on Marys Room, a thought experiment first proposed by Frank Jackson in 1982
References
 Definition of AI as the study of intelligent agents:
Poole, Mackworth  Goebel 1998, p. 1, which provides the version that is used in this article. Note that they use the term computational intelligence as a synonym for artificial intelligence.
Russell  Norvig 2003 who prefer the term rational agent and write The wholeagent view is now widely accepted in the field Russell  Norvig 2003, p. 55.
Nilsson 1998
Legg  Hutter 2007.
 Russell  Norvig 2009, p. 2.
 Maloof, Mark. Artificial Intelligence: An Introduction, p. 37 PDF. georgetown.edu.
 Schank, Roger C. 1991. Wheres the AI. AI magazine. Vol. 12 no. 4. p. 38.
 Russell  Norvig 2009.
 AlphaGo  Google DeepMind. Archived from the original on 10 March 2016.
 Optimism of early AI:
Herbert Simon quote: Simon 1965, p. 96 quoted in Crevier 1993, p. 109.
Marvin Minsky quote: Minsky 1967, p. 2 quoted in Crevier 1993, p. 109.
 Boom of the 1980s: rise of expert systems, Fifth Generation Project, Alvey, MCC, SCI:
McCorduck 2004, pp. 426441
Crevier 1993, pp. 161162,197203, 211, 240
Russell  Norvig 2003, p. 24
NRC 1999, pp. 210211
 First AI Winter, Mansfield Amendment, Lighthill report
Crevier 1993, pp. 115117
Russell  Norvig 2003, p. 22
NRC 1999, pp. 212213
Howe 1994
 Second AI winter:
McCorduck 2004, pp. 430435
Crevier 1993, pp. 209210
NRC 1999, pp. 214216
 AI becomes hugely successful in the early 21st century
Clark 2015
 Pamela McCorduck 2004, pp. 424 writes of the rough shattering of AI in subfieldsvision, natural language, decision theory, genetic algorithms, robotics ... and these with own subsubfieldthat would hardly have anything to say to each other.
 This list of intelligent traits is based on the topics covered by the major AI textbooks, including:
Russell  Norvig 2003
Luger  Stubblefield 2004
Poole, Mackworth  Goebel 1998
Nilsson 1998
 Biological intelligence vs. intelligence in general:
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 23, who make the analogy with aeronautical engineering.
McCorduck 2004, pp. 100101, who writes that there are two major branches of artificial intelligence: one aimed at producing intelligent behavior regardless of how it was accomplished, and the other aimed at modeling intelligent processes found in nature, particularly human ones.
Kolata 1982, a paper in Science, which describes McCarthys indifference to biological models. Kolata quotes McCarthy as writing: This is AI, so we dont care if its psychologically real https:books.google.combooks?idPEkqAAAAMAAJ. Missing or empty title help. McCarthy recently reiterated his position at the AI50 conference where he said Artificial intelligence is not, by definition, simulation of human intelligence Maker 2006.
 Neats vs. scruffies:
McCorduck 2004, pp. 421424, 486489
Crevier 1993, pp. 168
Nilsson 1983, pp. 1011
 Symbolic vs. subsymbolic AI:
Nilsson 1998, p. 7, who uses the term subsymbolic.
 General intelligence strong AI is discussed in popular introductions to AI:
Kurzweil 1999 and Kurzweil 2005
 See the Dartmouth proposal, under Philosophy, below.
 This is a central idea of Pamela McCorducks Machines Who Think. She writes: I like to think of artificial intelligence as the scientific apotheosis of a venerable cultural tradition. McCorduck 2004, p. 34 Artificial intelligence in one form or another is an idea that has pervaded Western intellectual history, a dream in urgent need of being realized. McCorduck 2004, p. xviii Our history is full of attemptsnutty, eerie, comical, earnest, legendary and realto make artificial intelligences, to reproduce what is the essential usbypassing the ordinary means. Back and forth between myth and reality, our imaginations supplying what our workshops couldnt, we have engaged for a long time in this odd form of selfreproduction. McCorduck 2004, p. 3 She traces the desire back to its Hellenistic roots and calls it the urge to forge the Gods. McCorduck 2004, pp. 340400
 Stephen Hawking believes AI could be mankinds last accomplishment. BetaNews. 21 October 2016. Archived from the original on 28 August 2017.
 Ford, Martin; Colvin, Geoff 6 September 2015. Will robots create more jobs than they destroy?. The Guardian. Retrieved 13 January 2018.
 Google is hosting a global contest to develop AI thats beneficial for humanity
 AI applications widely used behind the scenes:
Russell  Norvig 2003, p. 28
Kurzweil 2005, p. 265
NRC 1999, pp. 216222
 AI in myth:
McCorduck 2004, pp. 45
Russell  Norvig 2003, p. 939
 AI in early science fiction.
McCorduck 2004, pp. 1725
 Formal reasoning:
Berlinski, David 2000. The Advent of the Algorithm. Harcourt Books. ISBN 0156013916. OCLC 46890682.
 Artificial Intelligence. Encyclopedia of Emerging Industries, edited by Lynn M. Pearce, 6th ed., Gale, 2011, pp. 7380. Gale Virtual Reference Library, http:link.galegroup.comappsdocCX1930200017GVRL?umccpvsidGVRLxidcd5adac2. Accessed 31 Mar. 2018.
 Russell  Norvig 2009, p. 16.
 Dartmouth conference:
McCorduck 2004, pp. 111136
Crevier 1993, pp. 4749, who writes the conference is generally recognized as the official birthdate of the new science.
Russell  Norvig 2003, p. 17, who call the conference the birth of artificial intelligence.
NRC 1999, pp. 200201
 Hegemony of the Dartmouth conference attendees:
Russell  Norvig 2003, p. 17, who write for the next 20 years the field would be dominated by these people and their students.
McCorduck 2004, pp. 129130
 Russell  Norvig 2003, p. 18.
 Schaeffer J. 2009 Didnt Samuel Solve That Game?. In: One Jump Ahead. Springer, Boston, MA
 Samuel, A. L. July 1959. Some Studies in Machine Learning Using the Game of Checkers. IBM Journal of Research and Development. 3 3: 210229. doi:10.1147rd.33.0210.
 Golden years of AI successful symbolic reasoning programs 19561973:
McCorduck 2004, pp. 243252
Crevier 1993, pp. 52107
Moravec 1988, p. 9
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 1821
The programs described are Arthur Samuels checkers program for the IBM 701, Daniel Bobrows STUDENT, Newell and Simons Logic Theorist and Terry Winograds SHRDLU.
 DARPA pours money into undirected pure research into AI during the 1960s:
McCorduck 2004, pp. 131
Crevier 1993, pp. 51, 6465
NRC 1999, pp. 204205
 AI in England:
Howe 1994
 Lighthill 1973.
 Expert systems:
ACM 1998, I.2.1
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 2224
Luger  Stubblefield 2004, pp. 227331
Nilsson 1998, chpt. 17.4
McCorduck 2004, pp. 327335, 434435
Crevier 1993, pp. 14562, 197203
 Formal methods are now preferred Victory of the neats:
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 2526
McCorduck 2004, pp. 486487
 McCorduck 2004, pp. 480483.
 Markoff 2011.
 Ask the AI experts: Whats driving todays progress in AI?. McKinsey  Company. Retrieved 13 April 2018.
 Administrator. Kinects AI breakthrough explained. iprogrammer.info. Archived from the original on 1 February 2016.
 Rowinski, Dan 15 January 2013. Virtual Personal Assistants  The Future Of Your Smartphone Infographic. ReadWrite. Archived from the original on 22 December 2015.
 Artificial intelligence: Googles AlphaGo beats Go master Lee Sedol. BBC News. 12 March 2016. Archived from the original on 26 August 2016. Retrieved 1 October 2016.
 After Win in China, AlphaGos Designers Explore New AI. 27 May 2017. Archived from the original on 2 June 2017.
 Worlds Go Player Ratings. May 2017. Archived from the original on 1 April 2017.
 19  in Chinese. May 2017. Archived from the original on 11 August 2017.
 Clark, Jack 8 December 2015. Why 2015 Was a Breakthrough Year in Artificial Intelligence. Bloomberg News. Archived from the original on 23 November 2016. Retrieved 23 November 2016. After a halfdecade of quiet breakthroughs in artificial intelligence, 2015 has been a landmark year. Computers are smarter and learning faster than ever.
 Reshaping Business With Artificial Intelligence. MIT Sloan Management Review. Retrieved 2 May 2018.
 Lorica, Ben 18 December 2017. The state of AI adoption. OReilly Media. Retrieved 2 May 2018.
 Whos afraid of artificial intelligence in China?  DW  18.09.2018. DW.COM. September 2018. Retrieved 4 November 2018.
 Review  How two AI superpowers  the U.S. and China  battle for supremacy in the field. Washington Post. 2 November 2018. Retrieved 4 November 2018.
 Domingos 2015, Chapter 5.
 Domingos 2015, Chapter 7.
 Lindenbaum, M., Markovitch, S.,  Rusakov, D. 2004. Selective sampling for nearest neighbor classifiers. Machine learning, 542, 125152.
 Domingos 2015, Chapter 1.
 Intractability and efficiency and the combinatorial explosion:
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 9, 2122
 Domingos 2015, Chapter 2, Chapter 3.
 Hart, P. E.; Nilsson, N. J.; Raphael, B. 1972. Correction to A Formal Basis for the Heuristic Determination of Minimum Cost Paths. SIGART Newsletter 37: 2829. doi:10.11451056777.1056779.
 Algorithm in Artificial Intelligence.
 Domingos 2015, Chapter 2, Chapter 4, Chapter 6.
 Can neural network computers learn from experience, and if so, could they ever become what we would call smart?. Scientific American. 2018. Retrieved 24 March 2018.
 Domingos 2015, Chapter 6, Chapter 7.
 Domingos 2015, p. 286.
 Single pixel change fools AI programs. BBC News. 3 November 2017. Retrieved 12 March 2018.
 AI Has a Hallucination Problem Thats Proving Tough to Fix. WIRED. 2018. Retrieved 12 March 2018.
 Goodfellow, Ian J., Jonathon Shlens, and Christian Szegedy. Explaining and harnessing adversarial examples. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6572 2014.
 Matti, D.; Ekenel, H. K.; Thiran, J. P. 2017. Combining LiDAR space clustering and convolutional neural networks for pedestrian detection. 2017 14th IEEE International Conference on Advanced Video and Signal Based Surveillance AVSS: 16. doi:10.1109AVSS.2017.8078512. ISBN 9781538629390.
 Ferguson, Sarah; Luders, Brandon; Grande, Robert C.; How, Jonathan P. 2015. RealTime Predictive Modeling and Robust Avoidance of Pedestrians with Uncertain, Changing Intentions. Algorithmic Foundations of Robotics XI. Springer Tracts in Advanced Robotics. Springer, Cham. 107: 161177. arXiv:1405.5581. doi:10.1007978331916595010. ISBN 9783319165943.
 Cultivating Common Sense  DiscoverMagazine.com. Discover Magazine. 2017. Retrieved 24 March 2018.
 Davis, Ernest; Marcus, Gary 24 August 2015. Commonsense reasoning and commonsense knowledge in artificial intelligence. Communications of the ACM. 58 9: 92103. doi:10.11452701413.
 Winograd, Terry January 1972. Understanding natural language. Cognitive Psychology. 3 1: 1191. doi:10.10160010028572900023.
 Dont worry: Autonomous cars arent coming tomorrow or next year. Autoweek. 2016. Retrieved 24 March 2018.
 Knight, Will 2017. Boston may be famous for bad drivers, but its the testing ground for a smarter selfdriving car. MIT Technology Review. Retrieved 27 March 2018.
 Prakken, Henry 31 August 2017. On the problem of making autonomous vehicles conform to traffic law. Artificial Intelligence and Law. 25 3: 341363. doi:10.1007s1050601792100.
 Problem solving, puzzle solving, game playing and deduction:
Russell  Norvig 2003, chpt. 39,
Poole, Mackworth  Goebel 1998, chpt. 2,3,7,9,
Luger  Stubblefield 2004, chpt. 3,4,6,8,
Nilsson 1998, chpt. 712
 Uncertain reasoning:
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 452644,
Poole, Mackworth  Goebel 1998, pp. 345395,
Luger  Stubblefield 2004, pp. 333381,
Nilsson 1998, chpt. 19
 Psychological evidence of subsymbolic reasoning:
Wason  Shapiro 1966 showed that people do poorly on completely abstract problems, but if the problem is restated to allow the use of intuitive social intelligence, performance dramatically improves. See Wason selection task
Kahneman, Slovic  Tversky 1982 have shown that people are terrible at elementary problems that involve uncertain reasoning. See list of cognitive biases for several examples.
Lakoff  Nez 2000 have controversially argued that even our skills at mathematics depend on knowledge and skills that come from the body, i.e. sensorimotor and perceptual skills. See Where Mathematics Comes From
 Knowledge representation:
ACM 1998, I.2.4,
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 320363,
Poole, Mackworth  Goebel 1998, pp. 2346, 6981, 169196, 235277, 281298, 319345,
Luger  Stubblefield 2004, pp. 227243,
Nilsson 1998, chpt. 18
 Knowledge engineering:
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 260266,
Poole, Mackworth  Goebel 1998, pp. 199233,
Nilsson 1998, chpt. 17.117.4
 Representing categories and relations: Semantic networks, description logics, inheritance including frames and scripts:
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 349354,
Poole, Mackworth  Goebel 1998, pp. 174177,
Luger  Stubblefield 2004, pp. 248258,
Nilsson 1998, chpt. 18.3
 Representing events and time:Situation calculus, event calculus, fluent calculus including solving the frame problem:
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 328341,
Poole, Mackworth  Goebel 1998, pp. 281298,
Nilsson 1998, chpt. 18.2
 Causal calculus:
Poole, Mackworth  Goebel 1998, pp. 335337
 Representing knowledge about knowledge: Belief calculus, modal logics:
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 341344,
Poole, Mackworth  Goebel 1998, pp. 275277
 Sikos, Leslie F. June 2017. Description Logics in Multimedia Reasoning. Cham: Springer. doi:10.10079783319540665. ISBN 9783319540665. Archived from the original on 29 August 2017.
 Ontology:
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 320328
 Smoliar, Stephen W.; Zhang, HongJiang 1994. Content based video indexing and retrieval. IEEE multimedia. 1.2: 6272.
 Neumann, Bernd; Mller, Ralf January 2008. On scene interpretation with description logics. Image and Vision Computing. 26 1: 82101. doi:10.1016j.imavis.2007.08.013.
 Kuperman, G. J.; Reichley, R. M.; Bailey, T. C. 1 July 2006. Using Commercial Knowledge Bases for Clinical Decision Support: Opportunities, Hurdles, and Recommendations. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association. 13 4: 369371. doi:10.1197jamia.M2055. PMC 1513681.
 MCGARRY, KEN 1 December 2005. A survey of interestingness measures for knowledge discovery. The Knowledge Engineering Review. 20 1: 39. doi:10.1017S0269888905000408.
 Bertini, M; Del Bimbo, A; Torniai, C 2006. Automatic annotation and semantic retrieval of video sequences using multimedia ontologies. MM 06 Proceedings of the 14th ACM international conference on Multimedia. 14th ACM international conference on Multimedia. Santa Barbara: ACM. pp. 679682.
 Qualification problem:
McCarthy  Hayes 1969
Russell  Norvig 2003page needed
While McCarthy was primarily concerned with issues in the logical representation of actions, Russell  Norvig 2003 apply the term to the more general issue of default reasoning in the vast network of assumptions underlying all our commonsense knowledge.
 Default reasoning and default logic, nonmonotonic logics, circumscription, closed world assumption, abduction Poole et al. places abduction under default reasoning. Luger et al. places this under uncertain reasoning:
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 354360,
Poole, Mackworth  Goebel 1998, pp. 248256, 323335,
Luger  Stubblefield 2004, pp. 335363,
Nilsson 1998, 18.3.3
 Breadth of commonsense knowledge:
Russell  Norvig 2003, p. 21,
Crevier 1993, pp. 113114,
Moravec 1988, p. 13,
Lenat  Guha 1989 Introduction
 Dreyfus  Dreyfus 1986.
 Gladwell 2005.
 Expert knowledge as embodied intuition:
Dreyfus  Dreyfus 1986 Hubert Dreyfus is a philosopher and critic of AI who was among the first to argue that most useful human knowledge was encoded subsymbolically. See Dreyfus critique of AI
Gladwell 2005 Gladwells Blink is a popular introduction to subsymbolic reasoning and knowledge.
Hawkins  Blakeslee 2005 Hawkins argues that subsymbolic knowledge should be the primary focus of AI research.
 Planning:
ACM 1998, I.2.8,
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 375459,
Poole, Mackworth  Goebel 1998, pp. 281316,
Luger  Stubblefield 2004, pp. 314329,
Nilsson 1998, chpt. 10.12, 22
 Information value theory:
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 600604
 Classical planning:
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 375430,
Poole, Mackworth  Goebel 1998, pp. 281315,
Luger  Stubblefield 2004, pp. 314329,
Nilsson 1998, chpt. 10.12, 22
 Planning and acting in nondeterministic domains: conditional planning, execution monitoring, replanning and continuous planning:
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 430449
 Multiagent planning and emergent behavior:
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 449455
 Alan Turing discussed the centrality of learning as early as 1950, in his classic paper Computing Machinery and Intelligence.Turing 1950 In 1956, at the original Dartmouth AI summer conference, Ray Solomonoff wrote a report on unsupervised probabilistic machine learning: An Inductive Inference Machine.Solomonoff 1956
 This is a form of Tom Mitchells widely quoted definition of machine learning: A computer program is set to learn from an experience E with respect to some task T and some performance measure P if its performance on T as measured by P improves with experience E.
 Learning:
ACM 1998, I.2.6,
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 649788,
Poole, Mackworth  Goebel 1998, pp. 397438,
Luger  Stubblefield 2004, pp. 385542,
Nilsson 1998, chpt. 3.3, 10.3, 17.5, 20
 What is Unsupervised Learning?. deepai.org.
 Jordan, M. I.; Mitchell, T. M. 16 July 2015. Machine learning: Trends, perspectives, and prospects. Science. 349 6245: 255260. Bibcode:2015Sci...349..255J. doi:10.1126science.aaa8415.
 Reinforcement learning:
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 763788
Luger  Stubblefield 2004, pp. 442449
 Natural language processing:
ACM 1998, I.2.7
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 790831
Poole, Mackworth  Goebel 1998, pp. 91104
Luger  Stubblefield 2004, pp. 591632
 Versatile question answering systems: seeing in synthesis Archived 1 February 2016 at the Wayback Machine., Mittal et al., IJIIDS, 52, 119142, 2011
 Applications of natural language processing, including information retrieval i.e. text mining and machine translation:
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 840857,
Luger  Stubblefield 2004, pp. 623630
 Cambria, Erik; White, Bebo May 2014. Jumping NLP Curves: A Review of Natural Language Processing Research Review Article. IEEE Computational Intelligence Magazine. 9 2: 4857. doi:10.1109MCI.2014.2307227.
 Machine perception:
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 537581, 863898
Nilsson 1998, chpt. 6
 Speech recognition:
ACM 1998, I.2.7
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 568578
 Object recognition:
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 885892
 Computer vision:
ACM 1998, I.2.10
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 863898
Nilsson 1998, chpt. 6
 Robotics:
ACM 1998, I.2.9,
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 901942,
Poole, Mackworth  Goebel 1998, pp. 443460
 Moving and configuration space:
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 916932
 Tecuci 2012.
 Robotic mapping localization, etc:
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 908915
 Cadena, Cesar; Carlone, Luca; Carrillo, Henry; Latif, Yasir; Scaramuzza, Davide; Neira, Jose; Reid, Ian; Leonard, John J. December 2016. Past, Present, and Future of Simultaneous Localization and Mapping: Toward the RobustPerception Age. IEEE Transactions on Robotics. 32 6: 13091332. doi:10.1109TRO.2016.2624754.
 Moravec, Hans 1988. Mind Children. Harvard University Press. p. 15.
 Chan, Szu Ping 15 November 2015. This is what will happen when robots take over the world. Retrieved 23 April 2018.
 IKEA furniture and the limits of AI. The Economist. 2018. Retrieved 24 April 2018.
 Kismet.
 Thompson, Derek 2018. What Jobs Will the Robots Take?. The Atlantic. Retrieved 24 April 2018.
 Scassellati, Brian 2002. Theory of mind for a humanoid robot. Autonomous Robots. 12 1: 1324.
 Cao, Yongcan; Yu, Wenwu; Ren, Wei; Chen, Guanrong February 2013. An Overview of Recent Progress in the Study of Distributed MultiAgent Coordination. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics. 9 1: 427438. arXiv:1207.3231. doi:10.1109TII.2012.2219061.
 Thro 1993.
 Edelson 1991.
 Tao  Tan 2005.
 Poria, Soujanya; Cambria, Erik; Bajpai, Rajiv; Hussain, Amir September 2017. A review of affective computing: From unimodal analysis to multimodal fusion. Information Fusion. 37: 98125. doi:10.1016j.inffus.2017.02.003.
 Emotion and affective computing:
Minsky 2006
 Waddell, Kaveh 2018. Chatbots Have Entered the Uncanny Valley. The Atlantic. Retrieved 24 April 2018.
 Pennachin, C.; Goertzel, B. 2007. Contemporary Approaches to Artificial General Intelligence. Artificial General Intelligence. Cognitive Technologies. Cognitive Technologies. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer. doi:10.100797835406867741. ISBN 9783540237334.
 Roberts, Jacob 2016. Thinking Machines: The Search for Artificial Intelligence. Distillations. 2 2: 1423. Retrieved 20 March 2018.
 The superhero of artificial intelligence: can this genius keep it in check?. the Guardian. 16 February 2016. Retrieved 26 April 2018.
 Mnih, Volodymyr; Kavukcuoglu, Koray; Silver, David; Rusu, Andrei A.; Veness, Joel; Bellemare, Marc G.; Graves, Alex; Riedmiller, Martin; Fidjeland, Andreas K.; Ostrovski, Georg; Petersen, Stig; Beattie, Charles; Sadik, Amir; Antonoglou, Ioannis; King, Helen; Kumaran, Dharshan; Wierstra, Daan; Legg, Shane; Hassabis, Demis 26 February 2015. Humanlevel control through deep reinforcement learning. Nature. 518 7540: 529533. Bibcode:2015Natur.518..529M. doi:10.1038nature14236.
 Sample, Ian 14 March 2017. Googles DeepMind makes AI program that can learn like a human. the Guardian. Retrieved 26 April 2018.
 From not working to neural networking. The Economist. 2016. Retrieved 26 April 2018.
 Domingos 2015.
 Artificial brain arguments: AI requires a simulation of the operation of the human brain
Russell  Norvig 2003, p. 957
Crevier 1993, pp. 271 and 279
A few of the people who make some form of the argument:
Moravec 1988
Kurzweil 2005, p. 262
Hawkins  Blakeslee 2005
The most extreme form of this argument the brain replacement scenario was put forward by Clark Glymour in the mid1970s and was touched on by Zenon Pylyshyn and John Searle in 1980.
 Goertzel, Ben; Lian, Ruiting; Arel, Itamar; de Garis, Hugo; Chen, Shuo December 2010. A world survey of artificial brain projects, Part II: Biologically inspired cognitive architectures. Neurocomputing. 74 13: 3049. doi:10.1016j.neucom.2010.08.012.
 Nils Nilsson writes: Simply put, there is wide disagreement in the field about what AI is all about Nilsson 1983, p. 10.
 AIs immediate precursors:
McCorduck 2004, pp. 51107
Crevier 1993, pp. 2732
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 15, 940
Moravec 1988, p. 3
 Haugeland 1985, pp. 112117
 The most dramatic case of subsymbolic AI being pushed into the background was the devastating critique of perceptrons by Marvin Minsky and Seymour Papert in 1969. See History of AI, AI winter, or Frank Rosenblatt.
 Cognitive simulation, Newell and Simon, AI at CMU then called Carnegie Tech:
McCorduck 2004, pp. 139179, 245250, 322323 EPAM
Crevier 1993, pp. 145149
 Soar history:
McCorduck 2004, pp. 450451
Crevier 1993, pp. 258263
 McCarthy and AI research at SAIL and SRI International:
McCorduck 2004, pp. 251259
Crevier 1993
 AI research at Edinburgh and in France, birth of Prolog:
Crevier 1993, pp. 193196
Howe 1994
 AI at MIT under Marvin Minsky in the 1960s :
McCorduck 2004, pp. 259305
Crevier 1993, pp. 83102, 163176
Russell  Norvig 2003, p. 19
 Cyc:
McCorduck 2004, p. 489, who calls it a determinedly scruffy enterprise
Crevier 1993, pp. 239243
Russell  Norvig 2003, p. 363365
Lenat  Guha 1989
 Knowledge revolution:
McCorduck 2004, pp. 266276, 298300, 314, 421
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 2223
 Frederick, HayesRoth; William, Murray; Leonard, Adelman. Expert systems. doi:10.103610978542.248550.
 Embodied approaches to AI:
McCorduck 2004, pp. 454462
Brooks 1990
Moravec 1988
 Weng et al. 2001.
 Lungarella et al. 2003.
 Asada et al. 2009.
 Oudeyer 2010.
 Revival of connectionism:
Crevier 1993, pp. 214215
Russell  Norvig 2003, p. 25
 Computational intelligence
IEEE Computational Intelligence Society Archived 9 May 2008 at the Wayback Machine.
 Hutson, Matthew 16 February 2018. Artificial intelligence faces reproducibility crisis. Science. pp. 725726. Bibcode:2018Sci...359..725H. doi:10.1126science.359.6377.725. Retrieved 28 April 2018.
 Norvig 2012.
 Langley 2011.
 Katz 2012.
 The intelligent agent paradigm:
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 27, 3258, 968972
Poole, Mackworth  Goebel 1998, pp. 721
Luger  Stubblefield 2004, pp. 235240
Hutter 2005, pp. 125126
The definition used in this article, in terms of goals, actions, perception and environment, is due to Russell  Norvig 2003. Other definitions also include knowledge and learning as additional criteria.
 Agent architectures, hybrid intelligent systems:
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 27, 932, 970972
Nilsson 1998, chpt. 25
 Hierarchical control system:
Albus 2002
 Laird, John 2008. Extending the Soar cognitive architecture. Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence and Applications. 171: 224.
 Lieto, Antonio; Bhatt, Mehul; Oltramari, Alessandro; Vernon, David May 2018. The role of cognitive architectures in general artificial intelligence. Cognitive Systems Research. 48: 13. doi:10.1016j.cogsys.2017.08.003.
 Search algorithms:
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 59189
Poole, Mackworth  Goebel 1998, pp. 113163
Luger  Stubblefield 2004, pp. 79164, 193219
Nilsson 1998, chpt. 712
 Forward chaining, backward chaining, Horn clauses, and logical deduction as search:
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 217225, 280294
Poole, Mackworth  Goebel 1998, pp. 4652
Luger  Stubblefield 2004, pp. 6273
Nilsson 1998, chpt. 4.2, 7.2
 State space search and planning:
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 382387
Poole, Mackworth  Goebel 1998, pp. 298305
Nilsson 1998, chpt. 10.12
 Uninformed searches breadth first search, depth first search and general state space search:
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 5993
Poole, Mackworth  Goebel 1998, pp. 113132
Luger  Stubblefield 2004, pp. 79121
Nilsson 1998, chpt. 8
 Heuristic or informed searches e.g., greedy best first and A:
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 94109,
Poole, Mackworth  Goebel 1998, pp. pp. 132147,
Luger  Stubblefield 2004, pp. 133150,
Nilsson 1998, chpt. 9,
Poole  Mackworth 2017, Section 3.6
 Optimization searches:
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 110116,120129
Poole, Mackworth  Goebel 1998, pp. 56163
Luger  Stubblefield 2004, pp. 127133
 Genetic programming and genetic algorithms:
Luger  Stubblefield 2004, pp. 509530,
Nilsson 1998, chpt. 4.2,
Holland 1975,
Koza 1992,
Poli, Langdon  McPhee 2008.
 Artificial life and society based learning:
Luger  Stubblefield 2004, pp. 530541
 Daniel Merkle; Martin Middendorf 2013. Swarm Intelligence. In Burke, Edmund K.; Kendall, Graham. Search Methodologies: Introductory Tutorials in Optimization and Decision Support Techniques. Springer Science  Business Media. ISBN 9781461469407.
 Logic:
ACM 1998, I.2.3,
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 194310,
Luger  Stubblefield 2004, pp. 3577,
Nilsson 1998, chpt. 1316
 Satplan:
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 402407,
Poole, Mackworth  Goebel 1998, pp. 300301,
Nilsson 1998, chpt. 21
 Explanation based learning, relevance based learning, inductive logic programming, case based reasoning:
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 678710,
Poole, Mackworth  Goebel 1998, pp. 414416,
Luger  Stubblefield 2004, pp. 422442,
Nilsson 1998, chpt. 10.3, 17.5
 Propositional logic:
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 204233,
Luger  Stubblefield 2004, pp. 4550
Nilsson 1998, chpt. 13
 Firstorder logic and features such as equality:
ACM 1998, I.2.4,
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 240310,
Poole, Mackworth  Goebel 1998, pp. 268275,
Luger  Stubblefield 2004, pp. 5062,
Nilsson 1998, chpt. 15
 Elkin, Charles 1994. The paradoxical success of fuzzy logic. IEEE expert. 9 4: 349.
 Fuzzy logic:
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 526527
 What is fuzzy logic? Are there computers that are inherently fuzzy and do not apply the usual binary logic?. Scientific American. Retrieved 5 May 2018.
 The Belief Calculus and Uncertain Reasoning, YenTeh Hsia
 Domingos 2015, chapter 6.
 Logic and Probability. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Retrieved 5 May 2018.
 Stochastic methods for uncertain reasoning:
ACM 1998, I.2.3,
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 462644,
Poole, Mackworth  Goebel 1998, pp. 345395,
Luger  Stubblefield 2004, pp. 165191, 333381,
Nilsson 1998, chpt. 19
 Bayesian networks:
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 492523,
Poole, Mackworth  Goebel 1998, pp. 361381,
Luger  Stubblefield 2004, pp. 182190, 363379,
Nilsson 1998, chpt. 19.34
 Bayesian inference algorithm:
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 504519,
Poole, Mackworth  Goebel 1998, pp. 361381,
Luger  Stubblefield 2004, pp. 363379,
Nilsson 1998, chpt. 19.4  7
 Domingos 2015, p. 210.
 Bayesian learning and the expectationmaximization algorithm:
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 712724,
Poole, Mackworth  Goebel 1998, pp. 424433,
Nilsson 1998, chpt. 20
 Bayesian decision theory and Bayesian decision networks:
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 597600
 Stochastic temporal models:
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 537581
Dynamic Bayesian networks:
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 551557
Hidden Markov model:
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 549551
Kalman filters:
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 551557
 decision theory and decision analysis:
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 584597,
Poole, Mackworth  Goebel 1998, pp. 381394
 Markov decision processes and dynamic decision networks:
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 613631
 Game theory and mechanism design:
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 631643
 Statistical learning methods and classifiers:
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 712754,
Luger  Stubblefield 2004, pp. 453541
 Decision tree:
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 653664,
Poole, Mackworth  Goebel 1998, pp. 403408,
Luger  Stubblefield 2004, pp. 408417
 Domingos 2015, p. 88.
 Neural networks and connectionism:
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 736748,
Poole, Mackworth  Goebel 1998, pp. 408414,
Luger  Stubblefield 2004, pp. 453505,
Nilsson 1998, chpt. 3
 Domingos 2015, p. 187.
 Knearest neighbor algorithm:
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 733736
 Domingos 2015, p. 188.
 kernel methods such as the support vector machine:
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 749752
 Gaussian mixture model:
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 725727
 Domingos 2015, p. 152.
 Naive Bayes classifier:
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 718
 Classifier performance:
van der Walt  Bernard 2006
 Russell  Norvig 2009, 18.12: Learning from Examples: Summary.
 Domingos 2015, Chapter 4.
 Why Deep Learning Is Suddenly Changing Your Life. Fortune. 2016. Retrieved 12 March 2018.
 Google leads in the race to dominate artificial intelligence. The Economist. 2017. Retrieved 12 March 2018.
 Feedforward neural networks, perceptrons and radial basis networks:
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 739748, 758
Luger  Stubblefield 2004, pp. 458467
 Competitive learning, Hebbian coincidence learning, Hopfield networks and attractor networks:
Luger  Stubblefield 2004, pp. 474505
 Seppo Linnainmaa 1970. The representation of the cumulative rounding error of an algorithm as a Taylor expansion of the local rounding errors. Masters Thesis in Finnish, Univ. Helsinki, 67.
 Griewank, Andreas 2012. Who Invented the Reverse Mode of Differentiation?. Optimization Stories, Documenta Matematica, Extra Volume ISMP 2012, 389400.
 Paul Werbos, Beyond Regression: New Tools for Prediction and Analysis in the Behavioral Sciences, PhD thesis, Harvard University, 1974.
 Paul Werbos 1982. Applications of advances in nonlinear sensitivity analysis. In System modeling and optimization pp. 762770. Springer Berlin Heidelberg. Online Archived 14 April 2016 at the Wayback Machine.
 Backpropagation:
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 744748,
Luger  Stubblefield 2004, pp. 467474,
Nilsson 1998, chpt. 3.3
 Hierarchical temporal memory:
Hawkins  Blakeslee 2005
 Artificial intelligence can evolve to solve problems. Science  AAAS. 10 January 2018. Retrieved 7 February 2018.
 Schmidhuber, J. 2015. Deep Learning in Neural Networks: An Overview. Neural Networks. 61: 85117. arXiv:1404.7828. doi:10.1016j.neunet.2014.09.003. PMID 25462637.
 Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville 2016. Deep Learning. MIT Press. Online Archived 16 April 2016 at the Wayback Machine.
 Hinton, G.; Deng, L.; Yu, D.; Dahl, G.; Mohamed, A.; Jaitly, N.; Senior, A.; Vanhoucke, V.; Nguyen, P.; Sainath, T.; Kingsbury, B. 2012. Deep Neural Networks for Acoustic Modeling in Speech Recognition  The shared views of four research groups. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine. 29 6: 8297. doi:10.1109msp.2012.2205597.
 Schmidhuber, Jrgen 2015. Deep Learning. Scholarpedia. 10 11: 32832. Bibcode:2015SchpJ..1032832S. doi:10.4249scholarpedia.32832. Archived from the original on 19 April 2016.
 Rina Dechter 1986. Learning while searching in constraintsatisfaction problems. University of California, Computer Science Department, Cognitive Systems Laboratory.Online Archived 19 April 2016 at the Wayback Machine.
 Igor Aizenberg, Naum N. Aizenberg, Joos P.L. Vandewalle 2000. MultiValued and Universal Binary Neurons: Theory, Learning and Applications. Springer Science  Business Media.
 Ivakhnenko, Alexey 1965. Cybernetic Predicting Devices. Kiev: Naukova Dumka.
 Ivakhnenko, Alexey 1971. Polynomial theory of complex systems. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man and Cybernetics 4: 364378.
 Hinton 2007.
 Research, AI 23 October 2015. Deep Neural Networks for Acoustic Modeling in Speech Recognition. airesearch.com. Retrieved 23 October 2015.
 Fukushima, K. 1980. Neocognitron: A selforganizing neural network model for a mechanism of pattern recognition unaffected by shift in position. Biological Cybernetics. 36 4: 193202. doi:10.1007bf00344251. PMID 7370364.
 Yann LeCun 2016. Slides on Deep Learning Online Archived 23 April 2016 at the Wayback Machine.
 Silver, David; Schrittwieser, Julian; Simonyan, Karen; Antonoglou, Ioannis; Huang, Aja; Guez, Arthur; Hubert, Thomas; Baker, Lucas; Lai, Matthew; Bolton, Adrian; Chen, Yutian; Lillicrap, Timothy; Fan, Hui; Sifre, Laurent; Driessche, George van den; Graepel, Thore; Hassabis, Demis 19 October 2017. Mastering the game of Go without human knowledge. Nature. 550 7676: 354359. Bibcode:2017Natur.550..354S. doi:10.1038nature24270. ISSN 00280836. AlphaGo Lee... 12 convolutional layersclosed access publication  behind paywall
 Recurrent neural networks, Hopfield nets:
Russell  Norvig 2003, p. 758
Luger  Stubblefield 2004, pp. 474505
 Hytyniemi, Heikki 1996. Turing machines are recurrent neural networks. Proceedings of STeP 96Publications of the Finnish Artificial Intelligence Society: 1324.
 P. J. Werbos. Generalization of backpropagation with application to a recurrent gas market model Neural Networks 1, 1988.
 A. J. Robinson and F. Fallside. The utility driven dynamic error propagation network. Technical Report CUEDFINFENGTR.1, Cambridge University Engineering Department, 1987.
 R. J. Williams and D. Zipser. Gradientbased learning algorithms for recurrent networks and their computational complexity. In Backpropagation: Theory, Architectures and Applications. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum, 1994.
 Sepp Hochreiter 1991, Untersuchungen zu dynamischen neuronalen Netzen Archived 6 March 2015 at the Wayback Machine., Diploma thesis. Institut f. Informatik, Technische Univ. Munich. Advisor: J. Schmidhuber.
 Schmidhuber, J. 1992. Learning complex, extended sequences using the principle of history compression. Neural Computation. 4 2: 234242. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.49.3934. doi:10.1162neco.1992.4.2.234.
 Hochreiter, Sepp; and Schmidhuber, Jrgen; Long ShortTerm Memory, Neural Computation, 98:17351780, 1997
 Alex Graves, Santiago Fernandez, Faustino Gomez, and Jrgen Schmidhuber 2006. Connectionist temporal classification: Labelling unsegmented sequence data with recurrent neural nets. Proceedings of ICML06, pp. 369376.
 Hannun, Awni; Case, Carl; Casper, Jared; Catanzaro, Bryan; Diamos, Greg; Elsen, Erich; Prenger, Ryan; Satheesh, Sanjeev; Sengupta, Shubho; Coates, Adam; Ng, Andrew Y. 2014. Deep Speech: Scaling up endtoend speech recognition. arXiv:1412.5567 cs.CL.
 Hasim Sak and Andrew Senior and Francoise Beaufays 2014. Long ShortTerm Memory recurrent neural network architectures for large scale acoustic modeling. Proceedings of Interspeech 2014.
 Li, Xiangang; Wu, Xihong 2015. Constructing Long ShortTerm Memory based Deep Recurrent Neural Networks for Large Vocabulary Speech Recognition. arXiv:1410.4281 cs.CL.
 Haim Sak, Andrew Senior, Kanishka Rao, Franoise Beaufays and Johan Schalkwyk September 2015: Google voice search: faster and more accurate. Archived 9 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine.
 Sutskever, Ilya; Vinyals, Oriol; Le, Quoc V. 2014. Sequence to Sequence Learning with Neural Networks. arXiv:1409.3215 cs.CL.
 Jozefowicz, Rafal; Vinyals, Oriol; Schuster, Mike; Shazeer, Noam; Wu, Yonghui 2016. Exploring the Limits of Language Modeling. arXiv:1602.02410 cs.CL.
 Gillick, Dan; Brunk, Cliff; Vinyals, Oriol; Subramanya, Amarnag 2015. Multilingual Language Processing From Bytes. arXiv:1512.00103 cs.CL.
 Vinyals, Oriol; Toshev, Alexander; Bengio, Samy; Erhan, Dumitru 2015. Show and Tell: A Neural Image Caption Generator. arXiv:1411.4555 cs.CV.
 Brynjolfsson, Erik; Mitchell, Tom 22 December 2017. What can machine learning do? Workforce implications. Science. pp. 15301534. Bibcode:2017Sci...358.1530B. doi:10.1126science.aap8062. Retrieved 7 May 2018.
 Sample, Ian 18 October 2017. Its able to create knowledge itself: Google unveils AI that learns on its own. the Guardian. Retrieved 7 May 2018.
 The AI revolution in science. Science  AAAS. 5 July 2017. Retrieved 7 May 2018.
 Will your job still exist in 10 years when the robots arrive?. South China Morning Post. 2017. Retrieved 7 May 2018.
 Borowiec, Tracey Lien, Steven 2016. AlphaGo beats human Go champ in milestone for artificial intelligence. latimes.com. Retrieved 7 May 2018.
 Brown, Noam; Sandholm, Tuomas 26 January 2018. Superhuman AI for headsup nolimit poker: Libratus beats top professionals. Science. pp. 418424. doi:10.1126science.aao1733. Retrieved 7 May 2018.
 Ontanon, Santiago; Synnaeve, Gabriel; Uriarte, Alberto; Richoux, Florian; Churchill, David; Preuss, Mike December 2013. A Survey of RealTime Strategy Game AI Research and Competition in StarCraft. IEEE Transactions on Computational Intelligence and AI in Games. 5 4: 293311. doi:10.1109TCIAIG.2013.2286295.
 Facebook Quietly Enters StarCraft War for AI Bots, and Loses. WIRED. 2017. Retrieved 7 May 2018.
 ILSVRC2017. imagenet.org. Retrieved 20181106.
 Schoenick, Carissa; Clark, Peter; Tafjord, Oyvind; Turney, Peter; Etzioni, Oren 23 August 2017. Moving beyond the Turing Test with the Allen AI Science Challenge. Communications of the ACM. 60 9: 6064. doi:10.11453122814.
 OBrien  Marakas 2011.
 Mathematical definitions of intelligence:
HernandezOrallo 2000
Dowe  Hajek 1997
HernandezOrallo  Dowe 2010
 HernndezOrallo, Jos; Dowe, David L.; HernndezLloreda, M.Victoria March 2014. Universal psychometrics: Measuring cognitive abilities in the machine kingdom. Cognitive Systems Research. 27: 5074. doi:10.1016j.cogsys.2013.06.001.
 Russell  Norvig 2009, p. 1.
 CNN 2006.
 N. Aletras; D. Tsarapatsanis; D. PreotiucPietro; V. Lampos 2016. Predicting judicial decisions of the European Court of Human Rights: a Natural Language Processing perspective. PeerJ Computer Science. Archived from the original on 29 October 2016.
 The Economist Explains: Why firms are piling into artificial intelligence. The Economist. 31 March 2016. Archived from the original on 8 May 2016. Retrieved 19 May 2016.
 Lohr, Steve 28 February 2016. The Promise of Artificial Intelligence Unfolds in Small Steps. The New York Times. Archived from the original on 29 February 2016. Retrieved 29 February 2016.
 Wakefield, Jane 15 June 2016. Social media outstrips TV as news source for young people. BBC News. Archived from the original on 24 June 2016.
 Smith, Mark 22 July 2016. So you think you chose to read this article?. BBC News. Archived from the original on 25 July 2016.
 10 Promising AI Applications in Health Care. Harvard Business Review. 20180510. Retrieved 20180828.
 Dina Bass 20 September 2016. Microsoft Develops AI to Help Cancer Doctors Find the Right Treatments. Bloomberg. Archived from the original on 11 May 2017.
 Gallagher, James 26 January 2017. Artificial intelligence as good as cancer doctors. BBC News. Archived from the original on 26 January 2017. Retrieved 26 January 2017.
 Langen, Pauline A.; Katz, Jeffrey S.; Dempsey, Gayle, eds. 18 October 1994, Remote monitoring of highrisk patients using artificial intelligence US5357427 A, archived from the original on 28 February 2017, retrieved 27 February 2017
 Senthilingam, Meera 12 May 2016. Are Autonomous Robots Your next Surgeons?. CNN. Cable News Network. Archived from the original on 3 December 2016. Retrieved 4 December 2016.
 Markoff, John 16 February 2011. On Jeopardy! Watson Win Is All but Trivial. The New York Times. Archived from the original on 22 September 2017.
 Ng, Alfred 7 August 2016. IBMs Watson gives proper diagnosis after doctors were stumped. NY Daily News. Archived from the original on 22 September 2017.
 33 Corporations Working On Autonomous Vehicles. CB Insights. N.p., 11 August 2016. 12 November 2016.
 West, Darrell M. Moving forward: Selfdriving vehicles in China, Europe, Japan, Korea, and the United States. Center for Technology Innovation at Brookings. N.p., September 2016. 12 November 2016.
 Burgess, Matt. The UK is about to Start Testing SelfDriving Truck Platoons. WIRED. Archived from the original on 22 September 2017. Retrieved 20 September 2017.
 Davies, Alex. Worlds First SelfDriving SemiTruck Hits the Road. WIRED. Archived from the original on 28 October 2017. Retrieved 20 September 2017.
 McFarland, Matt. Googles artificial intelligence breakthrough may have a huge impact on selfdriving cars and much more. The Washington Post 25 February 2015. Infotrac Newsstand. 24 October 2016
 Programming safety into selfdriving cars. National Science Foundation. N.p., 2 February 2015. 24 October 2016.
 ArXiv, E. T. 26 October 2015. Why SelfDriving Cars Must Be Programmed to Kill. Retrieved 17 November 2017, from https:www.technologyreview.coms542626whyselfdrivingcarsmustbeprogrammedtokill
 ONeill,, Eleanor 31 July 2016. Accounting, automation and AI. www.icas.com. Archived from the original on 18 November 2016. Retrieved 18 November 2016.
 Robots Beat Humans in Trading Battle. Archived 9 September 2009 at the Wayback Machine. BBC.com 8 August 2001
 CTO Corner: Artificial Intelligence Use in Financial Services  Financial Services Roundtable. Financial Services Roundtable. 2 April 2015. Archived from the original on 18 November 2016. Retrieved 18 November 2016.
 Marwala, Tshilidzi; Hurwitz, Evan 2017. Artificial Intelligence and Economic Theory: Skynet in the Market. London: Springer. ISBN 9783319661049.
 Why AI researchers like video games. The Economist. Archived from the original on 5 October 2017.
 Yannakakis, G. N. 2012, May. Game AI revisited. In Proceedings of the 9th conference on Computing Frontiers pp. 285292. ACM.
 Getting to grips with military robotics. The Economist. 25 January 2018. Retrieved 7 February 2018.
 Autonomous Systems: Infographic. www.siemens.com. Retrieved 7 February 2018.
 Artificial Intelligence Fuels New Global Arms Race. WIRED. Retrieved 24 December 2017.
 Clifford, Catherine 29 September 2017. In the same way there was a nuclear arms race, there will be a race to build A.I., says tech exec. CNBC. Retrieved 24 December 2017.
 Metz, Cade 15 March 2018. Pentagon Wants Silicon Valleys Help on A.I. The New York Times. Retrieved 19 March 2018.
 Chang, Hsihui; Kao, YiChing; Mashruwala, Raj; Sorensen, Susan M. 10 April 2017. Technical Inefficiency, Allocative Inefficiency, and Audit Pricing. Journal of Accounting, Auditing  Finance: 0148558X1769676. doi:10.11770148558X17696760.
 Busby, Mattha 30 April 2018. Revealed: how bookies use AI to keep gamblers hooked. the Guardian.
 Saini, M. 2018, July 13. How Machine Learning is Revolutionizing Casino and Gambling Industry. Medium. Retrieved from https:medium.commridula18692howmachinelearningisrevolutionizingcasinoandgamblingindustry4fc38b34bccc
 https:www.moma.orgcalendarexhibitions3863 Retrieved July 29, 2018
https:www.washingtonpost.comnewsinnovationswp20160310googlespsychedelicpaintbrushraisestheoldestquestioninart?noredirectonutmterm.11818aba2044 Retrieved July 29
 Unhuman: Art in the Age of AI  STATE Festival. Statefestival.org. Retrieved 20180913.
 https:www.artsy.netarticleartsyeditorialhardpaintingmadecomputerhuman. Retrieved July 29
 https:dl.acm.orgcitation.cfm?id3204480.3186697 Retrieved July 29
 The Turing test:
Turings original publication:
Turing 1950
Historical influence and philosophical implications:
Haugeland 1985, pp. 69
Crevier 1993, p. 24
McCorduck 2004, pp. 7071
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 23 and 948
 Dartmouth proposal:
McCarthy et al. 1955 the original proposal
Crevier 1993, p. 49 historical significance
 The physical symbol systems hypothesis:
Newell  Simon 1976, p. 116
McCorduck 2004, p. 153
Russell  Norvig 2003, p. 18
 Dreyfus criticized the necessary condition of the physical symbol system hypothesis, which he called the psychological assumption: The mind can be viewed as a device operating on bits of information according to formal rules. Dreyfus 1992, p. 156
 Dreyfus critique of artificial intelligence:
Dreyfus 1972, Dreyfus  Dreyfus 1986
Crevier 1993, pp. 120132
McCorduck 2004, pp. 211239
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 950952,
 Gdel 1951: in this lecture, Kurt Gdel uses the incompleteness theorem to arrive at the following disjunction: a the human mind is not a consistent finite machine, or b there exist Diophantine equations for which it cannot decide whether solutions exist. Gdel finds b implausible, and thus seems to have believed the human mind was not equivalent to a finite machine, i.e., its power exceeded that of any finite machine. He recognized that this was only a conjecture, since one could never disprove b. Yet he considered the disjunctive conclusion to be a certain fact.
 The Mathematical Objection:
Russell  Norvig 2003, p. 949
McCorduck 2004, pp. 448449
Making the Mathematical Objection:
Lucas 1961
Penrose 1989
Refuting Mathematical Objection:
Turing 1950 under 2 The Mathematical Objection
Hofstadter 1979
Background:
Gdel 1931, Church 1936, Kleene 1935, Turing 1937
 Graham Oppy 20 January 2015. Gdels Incompleteness Theorems. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Retrieved 27 April 2016. These Gdelian antimechanist arguments are, however, problematic, and there is wide consensus that they fail.
 Stuart J. Russell; Peter Norvig 2010. 26.1.2: Philosophical FoundationsWeak AI: Can Machines Act Intelligently?The mathematical objection. Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach 3rd ed.. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall. ISBN 0136042597. ...even if we grant that computers have limitations on what they can prove, there is no evidence that humans are immune from those limitations.
 Mark Colyvan. An introduction to the philosophy of mathematics. Cambridge University Press, 2012. From 2.2.2, Philosophical significance of Gdels incompleteness results: The accepted wisdom with which I concur is that the LucasPenrose arguments fail.
 Russel, Stuart., Daniel Dewey, and Max Tegmark. Research Priorities for Robust and Beneficial Artificial Intelligence. AI Magazine 36:4 2015. 8 December 2016.
 Rawlinson, Kevin 29 January 2015. Microsofts Bill Gates insists AI is a threat. BBC News. Archived from the original on 29 January 2015. Retrieved 30 January 2015.
 Holley, Peter 28 January 2015. Bill Gates on dangers of artificial intelligence: I dont understand why some people are not concerned. The Washington Post. ISSN 01908286. Archived from the original on 30 October 2015. Retrieved 30 October 2015.
 Gibbs, Samuel 27 October 2014. Elon Musk: artificial intelligence is our biggest existential threat. The Guardian. Archived from the original on 30 October 2015. Retrieved 30 October 2015.
 CellanJones, Rory 2 December 2014. Stephen Hawking warns artificial intelligence could end mankind. BBC News. Archived from the original on 30 October 2015. Retrieved 30 October 2015.
 Post, Washington. Tech titans like Elon Musk are spending 1 billion to save you from terminators. Archived from the original on 7 June 2016.
 Mller, Vincent C.; Bostrom, Nick 2014. Future Progress in Artificial Intelligence: A Poll Among Experts PDF. AI Matters. 1 1: 911. doi:10.11452639475.2639478. Archived PDF from the original on 15 January 2016.
 The mysterious artificial intelligence company Elon Musk invested in is developing gamechanging smart computers. Tech Insider. Archived from the original on 30 October 2015. Retrieved 30 October 2015.
 Clark, Jack. MuskBacked Group Probes Risks Behind Artificial Intelligence. Bloomberg.com. Archived from the original on 30 October 2015. Retrieved 30 October 2015.
 Elon Musk Is Donating 10M Of His Own Money To Artificial Intelligence Research. Fast Company. 15 January 2015. Archived from the original on 30 October 2015. Retrieved 30 October 2015.
 Is artificial intelligence really an existential threat to humanity?. Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists. 9 August 2015. Archived from the original on 30 October 2015. Retrieved 30 October 2015.
 The case against killer robots, from a guy actually working on artificial intelligence. Fusion.net. Archived from the original on 4 February 2016. Retrieved 31 January 2016.
 Will artificial intelligence destroy humanity? Here are 5 reasons not to worry. Vox. 22 August 2014. Archived from the original on 30 October 2015. Retrieved 30 October 2015.
 In the early 1970s, Kenneth Colby presented a version of Weizenbaums ELIZA known as DOCTOR which he promoted as a serious therapeutic tool. Crevier 1993, pp. 132144
 Joseph Weizenbaums critique of AI:
Weizenbaum 1976
Crevier 1993, pp. 132144
McCorduck 2004, pp. 356373
Russell  Norvig 2003, p. 961
Weizenbaum the AI researcher who developed the first chatterbot program, ELIZA argued in 1976 that the misuse of artificial intelligence has the potential to devalue human life.
 E McGaughey, Will Robots Automate Your Job Away? Full Employment, Basic Income, and Economic Democracy 2018 SSRN, part 23
 Automation and anxiety. The Economist. 9 May 2015. Retrieved 13 January 2018.
 Lohr, Steve 2017. Robots Will Take Jobs, but Not as Fast as Some Fear, New Report Says. The New York Times. Retrieved 13 January 2018.
 Frey, Carl Benedikt; Osborne, Michael A 1 January 2017. The future of employment: How susceptible are jobs to computerisation?. Technological Forecasting and Social Change. 114: 254280. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.395.416. doi:10.1016j.techfore.2016.08.019. ISSN 00401625.
 Arntz, Melanie, Terry Gregory, and Ulrich Zierahn. The risk of automation for jobs in OECD countries: A comparative analysis. OECD Social, Employment, and Migration Working Papers 189 2016. p. 33.
 Mahdawi, Arwa 26 June 2017. What jobs will still be around in 20 years? Read this to prepare your future. The Guardian. Retrieved 13 January 2018.
 Stephen Hawking, Elon Musk, and Bill Gates Warn About Artificial Intelligence. Observer. 19 August 2015. Archived from the original on 30 October 2015. Retrieved 30 October 2015.
 Wendell Wallach 2010. Moral Machines, Oxford University Press.
 Wallach, pp 3754.
 Wallach, pp 5573.
 Wallach, Introduction chapter.
 Michael Anderson and Susan Leigh Anderson 2011, Machine Ethics, Cambridge University Press.
 Machine Ethics. aaai.org. Archived from the original on 29 November 2014.
 Rubin, Charles Spring 2003. Artificial Intelligence and Human Nature The New Atlantis. 1: 88100. Archived from the original on 11 June 2012.
 Brooks, Rodney 10 November 2014. artificial intelligence is a tool, not a threat. Archived from the original on 12 November 2014.
 Chalmers, David 1995. Facing up to the problem of consciousness. Journal of Consciousness Studies. 2 3: 200219. See also this link
 Horst, Steven, 2005 The Computational Theory of Mind in The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
 This version is from Searle 1999, and is also quoted in Dennett 1991, p. 435. Searles original formulation was The appropriately programmed computer really is a mind, in the sense that computers given the right programs can be literally said to understand and have other cognitive states. Searle 1980, p. 1. Strong AI is defined similarly by Russell  Norvig 2003, p. 947: The assertion that machines could possibly act intelligently or, perhaps better, act as if they were intelligent is called the weak AI hypothesis by philosophers, and the assertion that machines that do so are actually thinking as opposed to simulating thinking is called the strong AI hypothesis.
 Searles Chinese room argument:
Searle 1980. Searles original presentation of the thought experiment.
Searle 1999.
Discussion:
Russell  Norvig 2003, pp. 958960
McCorduck 2004, pp. 443445
Crevier 1993, pp. 269271
 Robot rights:
Russell  Norvig 2003, p. 964
BBC News 2006
Prematurity of:
Henderson 2007
In fiction:
McCorduck 2004, p. 19025 discusses Frankenstein and identifies the key ethical issues as scientific hubris and the suffering of the monster, i.e. robot rights.
 Evans, Woody 2015. Posthuman Rights: Dimensions of Transhuman Worlds. Teknokultura. Universidad Complutense, Madrid. Archived from the original on 28 December 2016. Retrieved 5 December 2016.
 maschafilm. Content: Plug  Pray Film  Artificial Intelligence  Robots . plugandprayfilm.de. Archived from the original on 12 February 2016.
 Omohundro, Steve 2008. The Nature of SelfImproving Artificial Intelligence. presented and distributed at the 2007 Singularity Summit, San Francisco, CA.
 Technological singularity:
Vinge 1993
Kurzweil 2005
Russell  Norvig 2003, p. 963
 Lemmons, Phil April 1985. Artificial Intelligence. BYTE. p. 125. Archived from the original on 20 April 2015. Retrieved 14 February 2015.
 Transhumanism:
Moravec 1988
Kurzweil 2005
Russell  Norvig 2003, p. 963
 AI as evolution:
Edward Fredkin is quoted in McCorduck 2004, p. 401.
Butler 1863
Dyson 1998
 Buttazzo, G. July 2001. Artificial consciousness: Utopia or real possibility?. Computer IEEE. 34 7: 2430. doi:10.11092.933500. Archived from the original on 30 December 2016. Retrieved 29 December 2016.
 Anderson, Susan Leigh. Asimovs three laws of robotics and machine metaethics. AI  Society 22.4 2008: 477493.
 McCauley, Lee 2007. AI armageddon and the three laws of robotics. Ethics and Information Technology. 9 2: 153164. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.85.8904. doi:10.1007s1067600791382.
 Galvan, Jill 1 January 1997. Entering the Posthuman Collective in Philip K. Dicks Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?. Science Fiction Studies. 24 3: 413429. JSTOR 4240644.
AI textbooks
Hutter, Marcus 2005. Universal Artificial Intelligence. Berlin: Springer. ISBN 9783540221395.
Jackson, Philip 1985. Introduction to Artificial Intelligence 2nd ed.. Dover. ISBN 048624864X.
Luger, George; Stubblefield, William 2004. Artificial Intelligence: Structures and Strategies for Complex Problem Solving 5th ed.. BenjaminCummings. ISBN 0805347801.
Neapolitan, Richard; Jiang, Xia 2018. Artificial Intelligence: With an Introduction to Machine Learning. Chapman  HallCRC. ISBN 9781138502383.
Nilsson, Nils 1998. Artificial Intelligence: A New Synthesis. Morgan Kaufmann. ISBN 9781558604674.
Russell, Stuart J.; Norvig, Peter 2003, Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach 2nd ed., Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: Prentice Hall, ISBN 0137903952.
Russell, Stuart J.; Norvig, Peter 2009. Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach 3rd ed.. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: Prentice Hall. ISBN 0136042597..
Poole, David; Mackworth, Alan; Goebel, Randy 1998. Computational Intelligence: A Logical Approach. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0195102703.
Winston, Patrick Henry 1984. Artificial Intelligence. Reading, MA: AddisonWesley. ISBN 0201082594.
Rich, Elaine 1983. Artificial Intelligence. McGrawHill. ISBN 0070522618.
Bundy, Alan 1980. Artificial Intelligence: An Introductory Course 2nd ed.. Edinburgh University Press. ISBN 085224410X.
Poole, David; Mackworth, Alan 2017. Artificial Intelligence: Foundations of Computational Agents 2nd ed.. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9781107195394.
History of AI
Crevier, Daniel 1993, AI: The Tumultuous Search for Artificial Intelligence, New York, NY: BasicBooks, ISBN 0465029973.
McCorduck, Pamela 2004, Machines Who Think 2nd ed., Natick, MA: A. K. Peters, Ltd., ISBN 1568812051.
Newquist, HP 1994. The Brain Makers: Genius, Ego, And Greed In The Quest For Machines That Think. New York: MacmillanSAMS. ISBN 0672304120.
Nilsson, Nils 2009. The Quest for Artificial Intelligence: A History of Ideas and Achievements. New York: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9780521122931.
Other sources
Asada, M.; Hosoda, K.; Kuniyoshi, Y.; Ishiguro, H.; Inui, T.; Yoshikawa, Y.; Ogino, M.; Yoshida, C. 2009. Cognitive developmental robotics: a survey. IEEE Transactions on Autonomous Mental Development. 1 1: 1234. doi:10.1109tamd.2009.2021702. Archived from the original on 4 October 2013.
ACM Computing Classification System: Artificial intelligence. ACM. 1998. Archived from the original on 12 October 2007. Retrieved 30 August 2007.
Goodman, Joanna 2016. Robots in Law: How Artificial Intelligence is Transforming Legal Services 1st ed.. Ark Group. ISBN 9781783582648.
Albus, J. S. 2002. 4DRCS: A Reference Model Architecture for Intelligent Unmanned Ground Vehicles PDF. In Gerhart, G.; Gunderson, R.; Shoemaker, C. Proceedings of the SPIE AeroSense Session on Unmanned Ground Vehicle Technology. 3693. pp. 1120. Archived from the original PDF on 25 July 2004.
Aleksander, Igor 1995. Artificial Neuroconsciousness: An Update. IWANN. Archived from the original on 2 March 1997. BibTex Archived 2 March 1997 at the Wayback Machine..
Bach, Joscha 2008. Seven Principles of Synthetic Intelligence. In Wang, Pei; Goertzel, Ben; Franklin, Stan. Artificial General Intelligence, 2008: Proceedings of the First AGI Conference. IOS Press. pp. 6374. ISBN 9781586038335.
Robots could demand legal rights. BBC News. 21 December 2006. Retrieved 3 February 2011.
Brooks, Rodney 1990. Elephants Dont Play Chess PDF. Robotics and Autonomous Systems. 6: 315. doi:10.1016S0921889005800259. Archived PDF from the original on 9 August 2007.
Brooks, R. A. 1991. How to build complete creatures rather than isolated cognitive simulators. In VanLehn, K. Architectures for Intelligence. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. pp. 225239. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.52.9510.
Buchanan, Bruce G. 2005. A Very Brief History of Artificial Intelligence PDF. AI Magazine: 5360. Archived from the original PDF on 26 September 2007.
Butler, Samuel 13 June 1863. Darwin among the Machines. Letters to the Editor. The Press. Christchurch, New Zealand. Retrieved 16 October 2014  via Victoria University of Wellington.
Clark, Jack 8 December 2015. Why 2015 Was a Breakthrough Year in Artificial Intelligence. Bloomberg News. Archived from the original on 23 November 2016. Retrieved 23 November 2016. After a halfdecade of quiet breakthroughs in artificial intelligence, 2015 has been a landmark year. Computers are smarter and learning faster than ever.
AI set to exceed human brain power. CNN. 26 July 2006. Archived from the original on 19 February 2008.
Dennett, Daniel 1991. Consciousness Explained. The Penguin Press. ISBN 0713990376.
Domingos, Pedro 2015. The Master Algorithm: How the Quest for the Ultimate Learning Machine Will Remake Our World. Basic Books. ISBN 9780465061921.
Dowe, D. L.; Hajek, A. R. 1997. A computational extension to the Turing Test. Proceedings of the 4th Conference of the Australasian Cognitive Science Society. Archived from the original on 28 June 2011.
Dreyfus, Hubert 1972. What Computers Cant Do. New York: MIT Press. ISBN 0060110821.
Dreyfus, Hubert; Dreyfus, Stuart 1986. Mind over Machine: The Power of Human Intuition and Expertise in the Era of the Computer. Oxford, UK: Blackwell. ISBN 0029080606.
Dreyfus, Hubert 1992. What Computers Still Cant Do. New York: MIT Press. ISBN 0262540673.
Dyson, George 1998. Darwin among the Machines. Allan Lane Science. ISBN 0738200301.
Edelman, Gerald 23 November 2007. Gerald Edelman  Neural Darwinism and Brainbased Devices. Talking Robots. Archived from the original on 8 October 2009.
Edelson, Edward 1991. The Nervous System. New York: Chelsea House. ISBN 9780791004647.
Fearn, Nicholas 2007. The Latest Answers to the Oldest Questions: A Philosophical Adventure with the Worlds Greatest Thinkers. New York: Grove Press. ISBN 0802118399.
Gladwell, Malcolm 2005. Blink. New York: Little, Brown and Co. ISBN 0316172324.
Gdel, Kurt 1951. Some basic theorems on the foundations of mathematics and their implications. Gibbs Lecture. In
Feferman, Solomon, ed. 1995. Kurt Gdel: Collected Works, Vol. III: Unpublished Essays and Lectures. Oxford University Press. pp. 30423. ISBN 9780195147223.
Haugeland, John 1985. Artificial Intelligence: The Very Idea. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. ISBN 0262081539.
Hawkins, Jeff; Blakeslee, Sandra 2005. On Intelligence. New York, NY: Owl Books. ISBN 0805078533.
Henderson, Mark 24 April 2007. Human rights for robots? Were getting carried away. The Times Online. London.
HernandezOrallo, Jose 2000. Beyond the Turing Test. Journal of Logic, Language and Information. 9 4: 447466. doi:10.1023A:1008367325700.
HernandezOrallo, J.; Dowe, D. L. 2010. Measuring Universal Intelligence: Towards an Anytime Intelligence Test. Artificial Intelligence Journal. 174 18: 15081539. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.295.9079. doi:10.1016j.artint.2010.09.006.
Hinton, G. E. 2007. Learning multiple layers of representation. Trends in Cognitive Sciences. 11 10: 428434. doi:10.1016j.tics.2007.09.004.
Hofstadter, Douglas 1979. Gdel, Escher, Bach: an Eternal Golden Braid. New York, NY: Vintage Books. ISBN 0394745027.
Holland, John H. 1975. Adaptation in Natural and Artificial Systems. University of Michigan Press. ISBN 0262581116.
Howe, J. November 1994. Artificial Intelligence at Edinburgh University: a Perspective. Retrieved 30 August 2007.
Hutter, M. 2012. One Decade of Universal Artificial Intelligence. Theoretical Foundations of Artificial General Intelligence. Atlantis Thinking Machines. 4. doi:10.299197894912166265. ISBN 9789491216619.
Kahneman, Daniel; Slovic, D.; Tversky, Amos 1982. Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. New York: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0521284147.
Kaplan, Andreas; Haenlein, Michael 2018. Siri, Siri in my Hand, whos the Fairest in the Land? On the Interpretations, Illustrations and Implications of Artificial Intelligence. Business Horizons. Retrieved 13 November 2018.
Katz, Yarden 1 November 2012. Noam Chomsky on Where Artificial Intelligence Went Wrong. The Atlantic. Retrieved 26 October 2014.
Kismet. MIT Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Humanoid Robotics Group. Retrieved 25 October 2014.
Koza, John R. 1992. Genetic Programming On the Programming of Computers by Means of Natural Selection. MIT Press. ISBN 0262111705.
Kolata, G. 1982. How can computers get common sense?. Science. 217 4566: 12371238. Bibcode:1982Sci...217.1237K. doi:10.1126science.217.4566.1237. PMID 17837639.
Kumar, Gulshan; Kumar, Krishan 2012. The Use of ArtificialIntelligenceBased Ensembles for Intrusion Detection: A Review. Applied Computational Intelligence and Soft Computing. 2012: 120. doi:10.11552012850160.
Kurzweil, Ray 1999. The Age of Spiritual Machines. Penguin Books. ISBN 0670882178.
Kurzweil, Ray 2005. The Singularity is Near. Penguin Books. ISBN 0670033847.
Lakoff, George; Nez, Rafael E. 2000. Where Mathematics Comes From: How the Embodied Mind Brings Mathematics into Being. Basic Books. ISBN 0465037712.
Langley, Pat 2011. The changing science of machine learning. Machine Learning. 82 3: 275279. doi:10.1007s109940115242y.
Law, Diane June 1994. Searle, Subsymbolic Functionalism and Synthetic Intelligence Technical report. University of Texas at Austin. p. AI94222. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.38.8384.
Legg, Shane; Hutter, Marcus 15 June 2007. A Collection of Definitions of Intelligence Technical report. IDSIA. arXiv:0706.3639. Bibcode:2007arXiv0706.3639L. 0707.
Lenat, Douglas; Guha, R. V. 1989. Building Large KnowledgeBased Systems. AddisonWesley. ISBN 0201517523.
Lighthill, James 1973. Artificial Intelligence: A General Survey. Artificial Intelligence: a paper symposium. Science Research Council.
Lucas, John 1961. Minds, Machines and Gdel. In Anderson, A.R. Minds and Machines. Archived from the original on 19 August 2007. Retrieved 30 August 2007.
Lungarella, M.; Metta, G.; Pfeifer, R.; Sandini, G. 2003. Developmental robotics: a survey. Connection Science. 15 4: 151190. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.83.7615. doi:10.108009540090310001655110.
Maker, Meg Houston 2006. AI50: AI Past, Present, Future. Dartmouth College. Archived from the original on 3 January 2007. Retrieved 16 October 2008.
Markoff, John 16 February 2011. Computer Wins on Jeopardy!: Trivial, Its Not. The New York Times. Retrieved 25 October 2014.
McCarthy, John; Minsky, Marvin; Rochester, Nathan; Shannon, Claude 1955. A Proposal for the Dartmouth Summer Research Project on Artificial Intelligence. Archived from the original on 26 August 2007. Retrieved 30 August 2007..
McCarthy, John; Hayes, P. J. 1969. Some philosophical problems from the standpoint of artificial intelligence. Machine Intelligence. 4: 463502. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.85.5082. Archived from the original on 10 August 2007. Retrieved 30 August 2007.
McCarthy, John 12 November 2007. What Is Artificial Intelligence?. Archived from the original on 18 November 2015.
Minsky, Marvin 1967. Computation: Finite and Infinite Machines. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: PrenticeHall. ISBN 0131654497.
Minsky, Marvin 2006. The Emotion Machine. New York, NY: Simon  Schusterl. ISBN 0743276639.
Moravec, Hans 1988. Mind Children. Harvard University Press. ISBN 0674576160.
Norvig, Peter 25 June 2012. On Chomsky and the Two Cultures of Statistical Learning. Peter Norvig. Archived from the original on 19 October 2014.
NRC United States National Research Council 1999. Developments in Artificial Intelligence. Funding a Revolution: Government Support for Computing Research. National Academy Press.
Needham, Joseph 1986. Science and Civilization in China: Volume 2. Caves Books Ltd.
Newell, Allen; Simon, H. A. 1976. Computer Science as Empirical Inquiry: Symbols and Search. Communications of the ACM. 19 3: 113126. doi:10.1145360018.360022. Archived from the original on 7 October 2008..
Nilsson, Nils 1983. Artificial Intelligence Prepares for 2001 PDF. AI Magazine. 1 1. Presidential Address to the Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence.
OBrien, James; Marakas, George 2011. Management Information Systems 10th ed.. McGrawHillIrwin. ISBN 9780073376813.
OConnor, Kathleen Malone 1994. The alchemical creation of life takwin and other concepts of Genesis in medieval Islam. University of Pennsylvania.
Oudeyer, PY. 2010. On the impact of robotics in behavioral and cognitive sciences: from insect navigation to human cognitive development PDF. IEEE Transactions on Autonomous Mental Development. 2 1: 216. doi:10.1109tamd.2009.2039057.
Penrose, Roger 1989. The Emperors New Mind: Concerning Computer, Minds and The Laws of Physics. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0198519737.
Poli, R.; Langdon, W. B.; McPhee, N. F. 2008. A Field Guide to Genetic Programming. Lulu.com. ISBN 9781409200734  via gpfieldguide.org.uk.
Rajani, Sandeep 2011. Artificial Intelligence  Man or Machine PDF. International Journal of Information Technology and Knowledge Management. 4 1: 173176. Archived from the original PDF on 18 January 2013.
Ronald, E. M. A. and Sipper, M. Intelligence is not enough: On the socialization of talking machines, Minds and Machines, vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 567576, November 2001.
Ronald, E. M. A. and Sipper, M. What use is a Turing chatterbox?, Communications of the ACM, vol. 43, no. 10, pp. 2123, October 2000.
Searle, John 1980. Minds, Brains and Programs. Behavioral and Brain Sciences. 3 3: 417457. doi:10.1017S0140525X00005756. Archived from the original on 18 January 2010.
Searle, John 1999. Mind, language and society. New York, NY: Basic Books. ISBN 0465045219. OCLC 231867665.
Shapiro, Stuart C. 1992. Artificial Intelligence. In Shapiro, Stuart C. Encyclopedia of Artificial Intelligence PDF 2nd ed.. New York: John Wiley. pp. 5457. ISBN 0471503061.
Simon, H. A. 1965. The Shape of Automation for Men and Management. New York: Harper  Row.
Skillings, Jonathan 3 July 2006. Getting Machines to Think Like Us. cnet. Retrieved 3 February 2011.
Solomonoff, Ray 1956. An Inductive Inference Machine PDF. Dartmouth Summer Research Conference on Artificial Intelligence  via std.com, pdf scanned copy of the original. Later published as
Solomonoff, Ray 1957. An Inductive Inference Machine. IRE Convention Record. Section on Information Theory, part 2. pp. 5662.
Tao, Jianhua; Tan, Tieniu 2005. Affective Computing and Intelligent Interaction. Affective Computing: A Review. LNCS 3784. Springer. pp. 981995. doi:10.100711573548.
Tecuci, Gheorghe MarchApril 2012. Artificial Intelligence. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Computational Statistics. Wiley. 4 2: 168180. doi:10.1002wics.200.
Thro, Ellen 1993. Robotics: The Marriage of Computers and Machines. New York: Facts on File. ISBN 9780816026289.
Turing, Alan October 1950, Computing Machinery and Intelligence, Mind, LIX 236: 433460, doi:10.1093mindLIX.236.433, ISSN 00264423.
van der Walt, Christiaan; Bernard, Etienne 2006. Data characteristics that determine classifier performance PDF. Archived from the original PDF on 25 March 2009. Retrieved 5 August 2009.
Vinge, Vernor 1993. The Coming Technological Singularity: How to Survive in the PostHuman Era.
Wason, P. C.; Shapiro, D. 1966. Reasoning. In Foss, B. M. New horizons in psychology. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Weizenbaum, Joseph 1976. Computer Power and Human Reason. San Francisco: W.H. Freeman  Company. ISBN 0716704641.
Weng, J.; McClelland; Pentland, A.; Sporns, O.; Stockman, I.; Sur, M.; Thelen, E. 2001. Autonomous mental development by robots and animals PDF. Science. 291 5504: 599600. doi:10.1126science.291.5504.599  via msu.edu.
Applications of AI. wwwformal.stanford.edu. Retrieved 25 September 2016.
Further reading
DH Autor, Why Are There Still So Many Jobs? The History and Future of Workplace Automation 2015 293 Journal of Economic Perspectives 3.
TechCast Article Series, John Sagi, Framing Consciousness
Boden, Margaret, Mind As Machine, Oxford University Press, 2006
Domingos, Pedro, Our Digital Doubles: AI will serve our species, not control it, Scientific American, vol. 319, no. 3 September 2018, pp. 8893.
Gopnik, Alison, Making AI More Human: Artificial intelligence has staged a revival by starting to incorporate what we know about how children learn, Scientific American, vol. 316, no. 6 June 2017, pp. 6065.
Johnston, John 2008 The Allure of Machinic Life: Cybernetics, Artificial Life, and the New AI, MIT Press
Marcus, Gary, Am I Human?: Researchers need new ways to distinguish artificial intelligence from the natural kind, Scientific American, vol. 316, no. 3 March 2017, pp. 5863. Multiple tests of artificialintelligence efficacy are needed because, just as there is no single test of athletic prowess, there cannot be one ultimate test of intelligence. One such test, a Construction Challenge, would test perception and physical actiontwo important elements of intelligent behavior that were entirely absent from the original Turing test. Another proposal has been to give machines the same standardized tests of science and other disciplines that schoolchildren take. A so far insuperable stumbling block to artificial intelligence is an incapacity for reliable disambiguation. Virtually every sentence that people generate is ambiguous, often in multiple ways. A prominent example is known as the pronoun disambiguation problem: a machine has no way of determining to whom or what a pronoun in a sentencesuch as he, she or itrefers.
E McGaughey, Will Robots Automate Your Job Away? Full Employment, Basic Income, and Economic Democracy 2018 SSRN, part 23.
Myers, Courtney Boyd ed. 2009. The AI Report. Forbes June 2009
Raphael, Bertram 1976. The Thinking Computer. W.H.Freeman and Company. ISBN 0716707233.
Serenko, Alexander 2010. The development of an AI journal ranking based on the revealed preference approach PDF. Journal of Informetrics. 4 4: 447459. doi:10.1016j.joi.2010.04.001.
Serenko, Alexander; Michael Dohan 2011. Comparing the expert survey and citation impact journal ranking methods: Example from the field of Artificial Intelligence PDF. Journal of Informetrics. 5 4: 629649. doi:10.1016j.joi.2011.06.002.
Sun, R.  Bookman, L. eds., Computational Architectures: Integrating Neural and Symbolic Processes. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Needham, MA. 1994.
Tom Simonite 29 December 2014. 2014 in Computing: Breakthroughs in Artificial Intelligence. MIT Technology Review.
External links
Artificial Intelligence
at Wikipedias sister projects
Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Wikimedia Commons
News from Wikinews
Quotations from Wikiquote
Texts from Wikisource
Textbooks from Wikibooks
Resources from Wikiversity
What Is AI?  An introduction to artificial intelligence by John McCarthya cofounder of the field, and the person who coined the term.
The Handbook of Artificial Intelligence Volume  by Avron Barr and Edward A. Feigenbaum Stanford University
Artificial Intelligence. Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Thomason, Richmond. Logic and Artificial Intelligence. In Zalta, Edward N. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
AI at Curlie
AITopics  A large directory of links and other resources maintained by the Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence, the leading organization of academic AI researchers.
List of AI Conferences  A list of 225 AI conferences taking place all over the world.
Artificial Intelligence, BBC Radio 4 discussion with John Agar, Alison Adam  Igor Aleksander In Our Time, Dec. 8, 2005
Links to related articles
vte
Risks from artificial intelligence
vte
Philosophy of mind
vte
Subfields of and scientists involved in cybernetics
vte
Major fields of computer science
vte
Evolutionary computation
vte
Emerging technologies
vte
Glossaries of science and engineering
Authority control Edit this at Wikidata
BNF: cb11932084t data GND: 40334478 LCCN: sh85008180 NDL: 00574798
Categories: Artificial intelligenceCyberneticsFormal sciencesTechnology in societyComputational neuroscienceEmerging technologiesUnsolved problems in computer scienceComputational fields of study

Machine learning
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
For the journal, see Machine Learning journal.
Statistical learning redirects here. For statistical learning in linguistics, see statistical learning in language acquisition.
Machine learning and
data mining
Kernel Machine.svg
Problemsshow
Supervised learning
classification  regression
show
Clusteringshow
Dimensionality reductionshow
Structured predictionshow
Anomaly detectionshow
Artificial neural networksshow
Reinforcement learningshow
Theoryshow
Machinelearning venuesshow
Glossary of artificial intelligenceshow
Related articlesshow
Portalpuzzle.svg Machine learning portal
vte
Machine learning ML is a field of artificial intelligence that uses statistical techniques to give computer systems the ability to learn e.g., progressively improve performance on a specific task from data, without being explicitly programmed.2

The name machine learning was coined in 1959 by Arthur Samuel.1 Machine learning explores the study and construction of algorithms that can learn from and make predictions on data3  such algorithms overcome following strictly static program instructions by making datadriven predictions or decisions,4:2 through building a model from sample inputs. Machine learning is employed in a range of computing tasks where designing and programming explicit algorithms with good performance is difficult or infeasible; example applications include email filtering, detection of network intruders, and computer vision.

Machine learning is closely related to and often overlaps with computational statistics, which also focuses on predictionmaking through the use of computers. It has strong ties to mathematical optimization, which delivers methods, theory and application domains to the field. Machine learning is sometimes conflated with data mining,5 where the latter subfield focuses more on exploratory data analysis and is known as unsupervised learning.67

Within the field of data analytics, machine learning is a method used to devise complex models and algorithms that lend themselves to prediction; in commercial use, this is known as predictive analytics. These analytical models allow researchers, data scientists, engineers, and analysts to produce reliable, repeatable decisions and results and uncover hidden insights through learning from historical relationships and trends in the data.8


Contents
1Overview
1.1Machine learning tasks
1.2Machine learning applications
2History and relationships to other fields
2.1Relation to data mining
2.2Relation to optimization
2.3Relation to statistics
3Theory
4Approaches
4.1Decision tree learning
4.2Association rule learning
4.3Artificial neural networks
4.3.1Deep learning
4.4Inductive logic programming
4.5Support vector machines
4.6Clustering
4.7Bayesian networks
4.8Representation learning
4.9Similarity and metric learning
4.10Sparse dictionary learning
4.11Genetic algorithms
4.12Rulebased machine learning
4.12.1Learning classifier systems
5Applications
6Limitations
6.1Bias
7Model assessments
8Ethics
9Software
9.1Free and opensource software
9.2Proprietary software with free and opensource editions
9.3Proprietary software
10Journals
11Conferences
12See also
13References
14Further reading
15External links
Overview
Tom M. Mitchell provided a widely quoted, more formal definition of the algorithms studied in the machine learning field: A computer program is said to learn from experience E with respect to some class of tasks T and performance measure P if its performance at tasks in T, as measured by P, improves with experience E.9 This definition of the tasks in which machine learning is concerned offers a fundamentally operational definition rather than defining the field in cognitive terms. This follows Alan Turings proposal in his paper Computing Machinery and Intelligence, in which the question Can machines think? is replaced with the question Can machines do what we as thinking entities can do?.10 In Turings proposal the various characteristics that could be possessed by a thinking machine and the various implications in constructing one are exposed.

Machine learning tasks

Machine learning tasks are typically classified into several broad categories:

Supervised learning: The computer is presented with example inputs and their desired outputs, given by a teacher, and the goal is to learn a general rule that maps inputs to outputs. As special cases, the input signal can be only partially available, or restricted to special feedback.
Semisupervised learning: The computer is given only an incomplete training signal: a training set with some often many of the target outputs missing.
Active learning: The computer can only obtain training labels for a limited set of instances based on a budget, and also has to optimize its choice of objects to acquire labels for. When used interactively, these can be presented to the user for labeling.
Unsupervised learning: No labels are given to the learning algorithm, leaving it on its own to find structure in its input. Unsupervised learning can be a goal in itself discovering hidden patterns in data or a means towards an end feature learning.
Reinforcement learning: Data in form of rewards and punishments are given only as feedback to the programs actions in a dynamic environment, such as driving a vehicle or playing a game against an opponent.4:3
Machine learning applications

A support vector machine is a classifier that divides its input space into two regions, separated by a linear boundary. Here, it has learned to distinguish black and white circles.
Another categorization of machine learning tasks arises when one considers the desired output of a machinelearned system:4:3

In classification, inputs are divided into two or more classes, and the learner must produce a model that assigns unseen inputs to one or more multilabel classification of these classes. This is typically tackled in a supervised way. Spam filtering is an example of classification, where the inputs are email or other messages and the classes are spam and not spam.
In regression, also a supervised problem, the outputs are continuous rather than discrete.
In clustering, a set of inputs is to be divided into groups. Unlike in classification, the groups are not known beforehand, making this typically an unsupervised task.
Density estimation finds the distribution of inputs in some space.
Dimensionality reduction simplifies inputs by mapping them into a lowerdimensional space. Topic modeling is a related problem, where a program is given a list of human language documents and is tasked to find out which documents cover similar topics.
Among other categories of machine learning problems, learning to learn learns its own inductive bias based on previous experience. Developmental learning, elaborated for robot learning, generates its own sequences also called curriculum of learning situations to cumulatively acquire repertoires of novel skills through autonomous selfexploration and social interaction with human teachers and using guidance mechanisms such as active learning, maturation, motor synergies, and imitation.

History and relationships to other fields
See also: Timeline of machine learning
Arthur Samuel, an American pioneer in the field of computer gaming and artificial intelligence, coined the term Machine Learning in 1959 while at IBM11. As a scientific endeavour, machine learning grew out of the quest for artificial intelligence. Already in the early days of AI as an academic discipline, some researchers were interested in having machines learn from data. They attempted to approach the problem with various symbolic methods, as well as what were then termed neural networks; these were mostly perceptrons and other models that were later found to be reinventions of the generalized linear models of statistics.12 Probabilistic reasoning was also employed, especially in automated medical diagnosis.13:488

However, an increasing emphasis on the logical, knowledgebased approach caused a rift between AI and machine learning. Probabilistic systems were plagued by theoretical and practical problems of data acquisition and representation.13:488 By 1980, expert systems had come to dominate AI, and statistics was out of favor.14 Work on symbolicknowledgebased learning did continue within AI, leading to inductive logic programming, but the more statistical line of research was now outside the field of AI proper, in pattern recognition and information retrieval.13:708710; 755 Neural networks research had been abandoned by AI and computer science around the same time. This line, too, was continued outside the AICS field, as connectionism, by researchers from other disciplines including Hopfield, Rumelhart and Hinton. Their main success came in the mid1980s with the reinvention of backpropagation.13:25

Machine learning, reorganized as a separate field, started to flourish in the 1990s. The field changed its goal from achieving artificial intelligence to tackling solvable problems of a practical nature. It shifted focus away from the symbolic approaches it had inherited from AI, and toward methods and models borrowed from statistics and probability theory.14 It also benefited from the increasing availability of digitized information, and the ability to distribute it via the Internet.

Relation to data mining
Machine learning and data mining often employ the same methods and overlap significantly, but while machine learning focuses on prediction, based on known properties learned from the training data, data mining focuses on the discovery of previously unknown properties in the data this is the analysis step of knowledge discovery in databases. Data mining uses many machine learning methods, but with different goals; on the other hand, machine learning also employs data mining methods as unsupervised learning or as a preprocessing step to improve learner accuracy. Much of the confusion between these two research communities which do often have separate conferences and separate journals, ECML PKDD being a major exception comes from the basic assumptions they work with: in machine learning, performance is usually evaluated with respect to the ability to reproduce known knowledge, while in knowledge discovery and data mining KDD the key task is the discovery of previously unknown knowledge. Evaluated with respect to known knowledge, an uninformed unsupervised method will easily be outperformed by other supervised methods, while in a typical KDD task, supervised methods cannot be used due to the unavailability of training data.

Relation to optimization
Machine learning also has intimate ties to optimization: many learning problems are formulated as minimization of some loss function on a training set of examples. Loss functions express the discrepancy between the predictions of the model being trained and the actual problem instances for example, in classification, one wants to assign a label to instances, and models are trained to correctly predict the preassigned labels of a set of examples. The difference between the two fields arises from the goal of generalization: while optimization algorithms can minimize the loss on a training set, machine learning is concerned with minimizing the loss on unseen samples.15

Relation to statistics
Machine learning and statistics are closely related fields. According to Michael I. Jordan, the ideas of machine learning, from methodological principles to theoretical tools, have had a long prehistory in statistics.16 He also suggested the term data science as a placeholder to call the overall field.16

Leo Breiman distinguished two statistical modelling paradigms: data model and algorithmic model,17 wherein algorithmic model means more or less the machine learning algorithms like Random forest.

Some statisticians have adopted methods from machine learning, leading to a combined field that they call statistical learning.18

Theory
Main article: Computational learning theory
A core objective of a learner is to generalize from its experience.419 Generalization in this context is the ability of a learning machine to perform accurately on new, unseen examplestasks after having experienced a learning data set. The training examples come from some generally unknown probability distribution considered representative of the space of occurrences and the learner has to build a general model about this space that enables it to produce sufficiently accurate predictions in new cases.

The computational analysis of machine learning algorithms and their performance is a branch of theoretical computer science known as computational learning theory. Because training sets are finite and the future is uncertain, learning theory usually does not yield guarantees of the performance of algorithms. Instead, probabilistic bounds on the performance are quite common. The biasvariance decomposition is one way to quantify generalization error.

For the best performance in the context of generalization, the complexity of the hypothesis should match the complexity of the function underlying the data. If the hypothesis is less complex than the function, then the model has underfit the data. If the complexity of the model is increased in response, then the training error decreases. But if the hypothesis is too complex, then the model is subject to overfitting and generalization will be poorer.20

In addition to performance bounds, computational learning theorists study the time complexity and feasibility of learning. In computational learning theory, a computation is considered feasible if it can be done in polynomial time. There are two kinds of time complexity results. Positive results show that a certain class of functions can be learned in polynomial time. Negative results show that certain classes cannot be learned in polynomial time.

Approaches
Main article: List of machine learning algorithms
Decision tree learning
Main article: Decision tree learning
Decision tree learning uses a decision tree as a predictive model, which maps observations about an item to conclusions about the items target value.

Association rule learning
Main article: Association rule learning
Association rule learning is a method for discovering interesting relations between variables in large databases.

Artificial neural networks
Main article: Artificial neural network
An artificial neural network ANN learning algorithm, usually called neural network NN, is a learning algorithm that is vaguely inspired by biological neural networks. Computations are structured in terms of an interconnected group of artificial neurons, processing information using a connectionist approach to computation. Modern neural networks are nonlinear statistical data modeling tools. They are usually used to model complex relationships between inputs and outputs, to find patterns in data, or to capture the statistical structure in an unknown joint probability distribution between observed variables.

Deep learning
Main article: Deep learning
Falling hardware prices and the development of GPUs for personal use in the last few years have contributed to the development of the concept of deep learning which consists of multiple hidden layers in an artificial neural network. This approach tries to model the way the human brain processes light and sound into vision and hearing. Some successful applications of deep learning are computer vision and speech recognition.21

Inductive logic programming
Main article: Inductive logic programming
Inductive logic programming ILP is an approach to rule learning using logic programming as a uniform representation for input examples, background knowledge, and hypotheses. Given an encoding of the known background knowledge and a set of examples represented as a logical database of facts, an ILP system will derive a hypothesized logic program that entails all positive and no negative examples. Inductive programming is a related field that considers any kind of programming languages for representing hypotheses and not only logic programming, such as functional programs.

Support vector machines
Main article: Support vector machines
Support vector machines SVMs are a set of related supervised learning methods used for classification and regression. Given a set of training examples, each marked as belonging to one of two categories, an SVM training algorithm builds a model that predicts whether a new example falls into one category or the other.

Clustering
Main article: Cluster analysis
Cluster analysis is the assignment of a set of observations into subsets called clusters so that observations within the same cluster are similar according to some predesignated criterion or criteria, while observations drawn from different clusters are dissimilar. Different clustering techniques make different assumptions on the structure of the data, often defined by some similarity metric and evaluated for example by internal compactness similarity between members of the same cluster and separation between different clusters. Other methods are based on estimated density and graph connectivity. Clustering is a method of unsupervised learning, and a common technique for statistical data analysis.

Bayesian networks
Main article: Bayesian network
A Bayesian network, belief network or directed acyclic graphical model is a probabilistic graphical model that represents a set of random variables and their conditional independencies via a directed acyclic graph DAG. For example, a Bayesian network could represent the probabilistic relationships between diseases and symptoms. Given symptoms, the network can be used to compute the probabilities of the presence of various diseases. Efficient algorithms exist that perform inference and learning.

Representation learning
Main article: Representation learning
Several learning algorithms, mostly unsupervised learning algorithms, aim at discovering better representations of the inputs provided during training. Classical examples include principal components analysis and cluster analysis. Representation learning algorithms often attempt to preserve the information in their input but transform it in a way that makes it useful, often as a preprocessing step before performing classification or predictions, allowing reconstruction of the inputs coming from the unknown data generating distribution, while not being necessarily faithful for configurations that are implausible under that distribution.

Manifold learning algorithms attempt to do so under the constraint that the learned representation is lowdimensional. Sparse coding algorithms attempt to do so under the constraint that the learned representation is sparse has many zeros. Multilinear subspace learning algorithms aim to learn lowdimensional representations directly from tensor representations for multidimensional data, without reshaping them into highdimensional vectors.22 Deep learning algorithms discover multiple levels of representation, or a hierarchy of features, with higherlevel, more abstract features defined in terms of or generating lowerlevel features. It has been argued that an intelligent machine is one that learns a representation that disentangles the underlying factors of variation that explain the observed data.23

Similarity and metric learning
Main article: Similarity learning
In this problem, the learning machine is given pairs of examples that are considered similar and pairs of less similar objects. It then needs to learn a similarity function or a distance metric function that can predict if new objects are similar. It is sometimes used in Recommendation systems.

Sparse dictionary learning
Main article: Sparse dictionary learning
In this method, a datum is represented as a linear combination of basis functions, and the coefficients are assumed to be sparse. Let x be a ddimensional datum, D be a d by n matrix, where each column of D represents a basis function. r is the coefficient to represent x using D. Mathematically, sparse dictionary learning means solving displaystyle xapprox Dr displaystyle xapprox Dr where r is sparse. Generally speaking, n is assumed to be larger than d to allow the freedom for a sparse representation.

Learning a dictionary along with sparse representations is strongly NPhard and also difficult to solve approximately.24 A popular heuristic method for sparse dictionary learning is KSVD.

Sparse dictionary learning has been applied in several contexts. In classification, the problem is to determine which classes a previously unseen datum belongs to. Suppose a dictionary for each class has already been built. Then a new datum is associated with the class such that its best sparsely represented by the corresponding dictionary. Sparse dictionary learning has also been applied in image denoising. The key idea is that a clean image patch can be sparsely represented by an image dictionary, but the noise cannot.25

Genetic algorithms
Main article: Genetic algorithm
A genetic algorithm GA is a search heuristic that mimics the process of natural selection, and uses methods such as mutation and crossover to generate new genotype in the hope of finding good solutions to a given problem. In machine learning, genetic algorithms found some uses in the 1980s and 1990s.2627 Conversely, machine learning techniques have been used to improve the performance of genetic and evolutionary algorithms.28

Rulebased machine learning
Rulebased machine learning is a general term for any machine learning method that identifies, learns, or evolves rules to store, manipulate or apply, knowledge. The defining characteristic of a rulebased machine learner is the identification and utilization of a set of relational rules that collectively represent the knowledge captured by the system. This is in contrast to other machine learners that commonly identify a singular model that can be universally applied to any instance in order to make a prediction.29 Rulebased machine learning approaches include learning classifier systems, association rule learning, and artificial immune systems.

Learning classifier systems
Main article: Learning classifier system
Learning classifier systems LCS are a family of rulebased machine learning algorithms that combine a discovery component e.g. typically a genetic algorithm with a learning component performing either supervised learning, reinforcement learning, or unsupervised learning. They seek to identify a set of contextdependent rules that collectively store and apply knowledge in a piecewise manner in order to make predictions.30

Applications
Applications for machine learning include:


This list has no precise inclusion criteria as described in the Manual of Style for standalone lists. Please improve this article by adding inclusion criteria. Discuss April 2018
Agriculture
Automated theorem proving3132
Adaptive websitescitation needed
Affective computing
Bioinformatics
Brainmachine interfaces
Cheminformatics
Classifying DNA sequences
Computational anatomy
Computer Networks
Telecommunication
Computer vision, including object recognition
Detecting creditcard fraud
General game playing33
Information retrieval
Internet fraud detection20
Computational linguistics
Marketing
Machine learning control
Machine perception
Automated medical diagnosis13
Computational economics
Insurance
Natural language processing
Natural language understanding34
Optimization and metaheuristic
Online advertising
Recommender systems
Robot locomotion
Search engines
Sentiment analysis or opinion mining
Sequence mining
Software engineering
Speech and handwriting recognition
Financial market analysis
Structural health monitoring
Syntactic pattern recognition
Time series forecasting
User behavior analytics
Machine translation35
In 2006, the online movie company Netflix held the first Netflix Prize competition to find a program to better predict user preferences and improve the accuracy on its existing Cinematch movie recommendation algorithm by at least 10. A joint team made up of researchers from ATT LabsResearch in collaboration with the teams Big Chaos and Pragmatic Theory built an ensemble model to win the Grand Prize in 2009 for 1 million.36 Shortly after the prize was awarded, Netflix realized that viewers ratings were not the best indicators of their viewing patterns everything is a recommendation and they changed their recommendation engine accordingly.37

In 2010 The Wall Street Journal wrote about the firm Rebellion Research and their use of Machine Learning to predict the financial crisis. 38

In 2012, cofounder of Sun Microsystems Vinod Khosla predicted that 80 of medical doctors jobs would be lost in the next two decades to automated machine learning medical diagnostic software.39

In 2014, it has been reported that a machine learning algorithm has been applied in Art History to study fine art paintings, and that it may have revealed previously unrecognized influences between artists.40

Limitations
Although machine learning has been transformative in some fields, effective machine learning is difficult because finding patterns is hard and often not enough training data are available; as a result, many machinelearning programs often fail to deliver the expected value.414243 Reasons for this are numerous: lack of suitable data, lack of access to the data, data bias, privacy problems, badly chosen tasks and algorithms, wrong tools and people, lack of resources, and evaluation problems.44

In 2018, a selfdriving car from Uber failed to detect a pedestrian, who got killed in the accident.45 Attempts to use machine learning in healthcare with the IBM Watson system failed to deliver even after years of time and billions of investment.4647

Bias
Main article: Algorithmic bias
Machine learning approaches in particular can suffer from different data biases. A machine learning system trained on your current customers only may not be able to predict the needs of new customer groups that are not represented in the training data. When trained on manmade data, machine learning is likely to pick up the same constitutional and unconscious biases already present in society.48 Language models learned from data have been shown to contain humanlike biases.4950 Machine learning systems used for criminal risk assessment have been found to be biased against black people.5152 In 2015, Google photos would often tag black people as gorillas,53 and in 2018 this still was not well resolved, but Google reportedly was still using the workaround to remove all gorilla from the training data, and thus was not able to recognize real gorillas at all.54 Similar issues with recognizing nonwhite people have been found in many other systems.55 In 2016, Microsoft tested a chatbot that learned from Twitter, and it quickly picked up racist and sexist language.56 Because of such challenges, the effective use of machine learning may take longer to be adopted in other domains.57

Model assessments
Classification machine learning models can be validated by accuracy estimation techniques like the Holdout method, which splits the data in a training and test set conventionally 23 training set and 13 test set designation and evaluates the performance of the training model on the test set. In comparison, the Nfoldcrossvalidation method randomly splits the data in k subsets where the k1 instances of the data are used to train the model while the kth instance is used to test the predictive ability of the training model. In addition to the holdout and crossvalidation methods, bootstrap, which samples n instances with replacement from the dataset, can be used to assess model accuracy.58

In addition to overall accuracy, investigators frequently report sensitivity and specificity meaning True Positive Rate TPR and True Negative Rate TNR respectively. Similarly, investigators sometimes report the False Positive Rate FPR as well as the False Negative Rate FNR. However, these rates are ratios that fail to reveal their numerators and denominators. The Total Operating Characteristic TOC is an effective method to express a models diagnostic ability. TOC shows the numerators and denominators of the previously mentioned rates, thus TOC provides more information than the commonly used Receiver Operating Characteristic ROC and ROCs associated Area Under the Curve AUC.59

Ethics
Machine learning poses a host of ethical questions. Systems which are trained on datasets collected with biases may exhibit these biases upon use algorithmic bias, thus digitizing cultural prejudices.60 For example, using job hiring data from a firm with racist hiring policies may lead to a machine learning system duplicating the bias by scoring job applicants against similarity to previous successful applicants.6162 Responsible collection of data and documentation of algorithmic rules used by a system thus is a critical part of machine learning.

Because language contains biases, machines trained on language corpora will necessarily also learn bias.63

Other forms of ethical challenges, not related to personal biases, are more seen in health care. There are concerns among health care professionals that these systems might not be designed in the publics interest, but as income generating machines. This is especially true in the United States where there is a perpetual ethical dilemma of improving health care, but also increasing profits. For example, the algorithms could be designed to provide patients with unnecessary tests or medication in which the algorithms proprietary owners hold stakes in. There is huge potential for machine learning in health care to provide professionals a great tool to diagnose, medicate, and even plan recovery paths for patients, but this will not happen until the personal biases mentioned previously, and these greed biases are addressed.64

Software
Software suites containing a variety of machine learning algorithms include the following :

Free and opensource software
CNTK
Deeplearning4j
ELKI
H2O
Mahout
Mallet
mlpack
MXNet
OpenNN
Orange
scikitlearn
Shogun
Spark MLlib
TensorFlow
Torch  PyTorch
Weka  MOA
Yooreeka
Proprietary software with free and opensource editions
KNIME
RapidMiner
Proprietary software
Amazon Machine Learning
Angoss KnowledgeSTUDIO
Ayasdi
IBM Data Science Experience
Google Prediction API
IBM SPSS Modeler
KXEN Modeler
LIONsolver
Mathematica
MATLAB
Microsoft Azure Machine Learning
Neural Designer
NeuroSolutions
Oracle Data Mining
Oracle AI Platform Cloud Service
RCASE
SAS Enterprise Miner
SequenceL
Splunk
STATISTICA Data Miner
Journals
Journal of Machine Learning Research
Machine Learning
Neural Computation
Conferences
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems
International Conference on Machine Learning
See also
iconArtificial intelligence portal
Machine learning portal
Artificial intelligence
Automated machine learning
Automatic reasoning
Big data
Computational intelligence
Computational neuroscience
Data science
Deep learning
Ethics of artificial intelligence
Existential risk from advanced artificial intelligence
Explanationbased learning
Important publications in machine learning
Information engineering
List of machine learning algorithms
List of datasets for machine learning research
Quantum machine learning
Similarity learning
Machinelearning applications in bioinformatics
References
 Samuel, Arthur 1959. Some Studies in Machine Learning Using the Game of Checkers. IBM Journal of Research and Development. 3 3: 210229. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.368.2254. doi:10.1147rd.33.0210.
 The without being explicitly programmed definition is often attributed to Arthur Samuel, who coined the term machine learning in 1959.1 But the phrase is not found literally in this publication, and may be a paraphrase that appeared later. Confer Paraphrasing Arthur Samuel 1959, the question is: How can computers learn to solve problems without being explicitly programmed? in Koza, John R.; Bennett, Forrest H.; Andre, David; Keane, Martin A. 1996. Automated Design of Both the Topology and Sizing of Analog Electrical Circuits Using Genetic Programming. Artificial Intelligence in Design 96. Springer, Dordrecht. pp. 151170. doi:10.100797894009027949.
 Ron Kohavi; Foster Provost 1998. Glossary of terms. Machine Learning. 30: 271274.
 Bishop, C. M. 2006, Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning, Springer, ISBN 9780387310732
 Mannila, Heikki 1996. Data mining: machine learning, statistics, and databases. Intl Conf. Scientific and Statistical Database Management. IEEE Computer Society.
 Machine learning and pattern recognition can be viewed as two facets of the same field.4:vii
 Friedman, Jerome H. 1998. Data Mining and Statistics: Whats the connection?. Computing Science and Statistics. 29 1: 39.
 Machine Learning: What it is and why it matters. www.sas.com. Retrieved 20160329.
 Mitchell, T. 1997. Machine Learning. McGraw Hill. p. 2. ISBN 9780070428072.
 Harnad, Stevan 2008, The Annotation Game: On Turing 1950 on Computing, Machinery, and Intelligence, in Epstein, Robert; Peters, Grace, The Turing Test Sourcebook: Philosophical and Methodological Issues in the Quest for the Thinking Computer, Kluwer
 R. Kohavi and F. Provost, Glossary of terms, Machine Learning, vol. 30, no. 23, pp. 271274, 1998.
 Sarle, Warren. Neural Networks and statistical models. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.27.699.
 Russell, Stuart; Norvig, Peter 2003 1995. Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach 2nd ed.. Prentice Hall. ISBN 9780137903955.
 Langley, Pat 2011. The changing science of machine learning. Machine Learning. 82 3: 275279. doi:10.1007s109940115242y.
 Le Roux, Nicolas; Bengio, Yoshua; Fitzgibbon, Andrew 2012. Improving First and SecondOrder Methods by Modeling Uncertainty. In Sra, Suvrit; Nowozin, Sebastian; Wright, Stephen J. Optimization for Machine Learning. MIT Press. p. 404.
 Michael I. Jordan 20140910. statistics and machine learning. reddit. Retrieved 20141001.
 Cornell University Library. Breiman: Statistical Modeling: The Two Cultures with comments and a rejoinder by the author. Retrieved 8 August 2015.
 Gareth James; Daniela Witten; Trevor Hastie; Robert Tibshirani 2013. An Introduction to Statistical Learning. Springer. p. vii.
 Mohri, Mehryar; Rostamizadeh, Afshin; Talwalkar, Ameet 2012. Foundations of Machine Learning. USA, Massachusetts: MIT Press. ISBN 9780262018258.
 Alpaydin, Ethem 2010. Introduction to Machine Learning. London: The MIT Press. ISBN 9780262012430. Retrieved 4 February 2017.
 Honglak Lee, Roger Grosse, Rajesh Ranganath, Andrew Y. Ng. Convolutional Deep Belief Networks for Scalable Unsupervised Learning of Hierarchical Representations Proceedings of the 26th Annual International Conference on Machine Learning, 2009.
 Lu, Haiping; Plataniotis, K.N.; Venetsanopoulos, A.N. 2011. A Survey of Multilinear Subspace Learning for Tensor Data PDF. Pattern Recognition. 44 7: 15401551. doi:10.1016j.patcog.2011.01.004.
 Yoshua Bengio 2009. Learning Deep Architectures for AI. Now Publishers Inc. pp. 13. ISBN 9781601982940.
 Tillmann, A. M. 2015. On the Computational Intractability of Exact and Approximate Dictionary Learning. IEEE Signal Processing Letters. 22 1: 4549. arXiv:1405.6664. Bibcode:2015ISPL...22...45T. doi:10.1109LSP.2014.2345761.
 Aharon, M, M Elad, and A Bruckstein. 2006. KSVD: An Algorithm for Designing Overcomplete Dictionaries for Sparse Representation. Signal Processing, IEEE Transactions on 54 11: 43114322
 Goldberg, David E.; Holland, John H. 1988. Genetic algorithms and machine learning. Machine Learning. 3 2: 9599. doi:10.1007bf00113892.
 Michie, D.; Spiegelhalter, D. J.; Taylor, C. C. 1994. Machine Learning, Neural and Statistical Classification. Ellis Horwood Series in Artificial Intelligence. Bibcode:1994mlns.book.....M.
 Zhang, Jun; Zhan, Zhihui; Lin, Ying; Chen, Ni; Gong, Yuejiao; Zhong, Jinghui; Chung, Henry S.H.; Li, Yun; Shi, Yuhui 2011. Evolutionary Computation Meets Machine Learning: A Survey PDF. Computational Intelligence Magazine. 6 4: 6875. doi:10.1109mci.2011.942584.
 Bassel, George W.; Glaab, Enrico; Marquez, Julietta; Holdsworth, Michael J.; Bacardit, Jaume 20110901. Functional Network Construction in Arabidopsis Using RuleBased Machine Learning on LargeScale Data Sets. The Plant Cell. 23 9: 31013116. doi:10.1105tpc.111.088153. ISSN 1532298X. PMC 3203449. PMID 21896882.
 Urbanowicz, Ryan J.; Moore, Jason H. 20090922. Learning Classifier Systems: A Complete Introduction, Review, and Roadmap. Journal of Artificial Evolution and Applications. 2009: 125. doi:10.11552009736398. ISSN 16876229.
 Bridge, James P., Sean B. Holden, and Lawrence C. Paulson. Machine learning for firstorder theorem proving. Journal of automated reasoning 53.2 2014: 141172.
 Loos, Sarah, et al. Deep Network Guided Proof Search. arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.06972 2017.
 Finnsson, Hilmar, and Yngvi Bjrnsson. SimulationBased Approach to General Game Playing. AAAI. Vol. 8. 2008.
 Sarikaya, Ruhi, Geoffrey E. Hinton, and Anoop Deoras. Application of deep belief networks for natural language understanding. IEEEACM Transactions on Audio, Speech and Language Processing TASLP 22.4 2014: 778784.
 AIbased translation to soon reach human levels: industry officials. Yonhap news agency. Retrieved 4 Mar 2017.
 BelKor Home Page research.att.com
 The Netflix Tech Blog: Netflix Recommendations: Beyond the 5 stars Part 1. Retrieved 8 August 2015.
 Scott Patterson 13 July 2010. Letting the Machines Decide. The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved 24 June 2018.
 Vonod Khosla January 10, 2012. Do We Need Doctors or Algorithms?. Tech Crunch.
 When A Machine Learning Algorithm Studied Fine Art Paintings, It Saw Things Art Historians Had Never Noticed, The Physics at ArXiv blog
 Why Machine Learning Models Often Fail to Learn: QuickTake QA. Bloomberg.com. 20161110. Retrieved 20170410.
 The First Wave of Corporate AI Is Doomed to Fail. Harvard Business Review. 20170418. Retrieved 20180820.
 Why the A.I. euphoria is doomed to fail. VentureBeat. 20160918. Retrieved 20180820.
 9 Reasons why your machine learning project will fail. www.kdnuggets.com. Retrieved 20180820.
 Why Ubers selfdriving car killed a pedestrian. The Economist. Retrieved 20180820.
 IBMs Watson recommended unsafe and incorrect cancer treatments  STAT. STAT. 20180725. Retrieved 20180821.
 Hernandez, Daniela; Greenwald, Ted 20180811. IBM Has a Watson Dilemma. Wall Street Journal. ISSN 00999660. Retrieved 20180821.
 Garcia, Megan 2016. Racist in the Machine. World Policy Journal. 33 4: 111117. doi:10.1215074027753813015. ISSN 07402775.
 Caliskan, Aylin; Bryson, Joanna J.; Narayanan, Arvind 20170414. Semantics derived automatically from language corpora contain humanlike biases. Science. 356 6334: 183186. arXiv:1608.07187. Bibcode:2017Sci...356..183C. doi:10.1126science.aal4230. ISSN 00368075. PMID 28408601.
 Wang, Xinan; Dasgupta, Sanjoy 2016, Lee, D. D.; Sugiyama, M.; Luxburg, U. V.; Guyon, I., eds., An algorithm for L1 nearest neighbor search via monotonic embedding PDF, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 29, Curran Associates, Inc., pp. 983991, retrieved 20180820
 Machine Bias. ProPublica. Julia Angwin, Jeff Larson, Lauren Kirchner, Surya Mattu. 20160523. Retrieved 20180820.
 Opinion  When an Algorithm Helps Send You to Prison. New York Times. Retrieved 20180820.
 Google apologises for racist blunder. BBC News. 20150701. Retrieved 20180820.
 Google fixed its racist algorithm by removing gorillas from its imagelabeling tech. The Verge. Retrieved 20180820.
 Opinion  Artificial Intelligences White Guy Problem. New York Times. Retrieved 20180820.
 Metz, Rachel. Why Microsofts teen chatbot, Tay, said lots of awful things online. MIT Technology Review. Retrieved 20180820.
 Simonite, Tom. Microsoft says its racist chatbot illustrates how AI isnt adaptable enough to help most businesses. MIT Technology Review. Retrieved 20180820.
 Kohavi, Ron 1995. A Study of CrossValidation and Bootstrap for Accuracy Estimation and Model Selection PDF. International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence.
 Pontius, Robert Gilmore; Si, Kangping 2014. The total operating characteristic to measure diagnostic ability for multiple thresholds. International Journal of Geographical Information Science. 28 3: 570583. doi:10.108013658816.2013.862623.
 Bostrom, Nick 2011. The Ethics of Artificial Intelligence PDF. Retrieved 11 April 2016.
 Edionwe, Tolulope. The fight against racist algorithms. The Outline. Retrieved 17 November 2017.
 Jeffries, Adrianne. Machine learning is racist because the internet is racist. The Outline. Retrieved 17 November 2017.
 Narayanan, Arvind August 24, 2016. Language necessarily contains human biases, and so will machines trained on language corpora. Freedom to Tinker.
 Char, D. S.; Shah, N. H.; Magnus, D. 2018. Implementing Machine Learning in Health CareAddressing Ethical Challenges. New England Journal of Medicine. 378 11: 981983. doi:10.1056nejmp1714229. PMC 5962261. PMID 29539284.
Further reading
Nils J. Nilsson, Introduction to Machine Learning.
Trevor Hastie, Robert Tibshirani and Jerome H. Friedman 2001. The Elements of Statistical Learning, Springer. ISBN 0387952845.
Pedro Domingos September 2015, The Master Algorithm, Basic Books, ISBN 9780465065707
Ian H. Witten and Eibe Frank 2011. Data Mining: Practical machine learning tools and techniques Morgan Kaufmann, 664pp., ISBN 9780123748560.
Ethem Alpaydin 2004. Introduction to Machine Learning, MIT Press, ISBN 9780262012430.
David J. C. MacKay. Information Theory, Inference, and Learning Algorithms Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003. ISBN 0521642981
Richard O. Duda, Peter E. Hart, David G. Stork 2001 Pattern classification 2nd edition, Wiley, New York, ISBN 0471056693.
Christopher Bishop 1995. Neural Networks for Pattern Recognition, Oxford University Press. ISBN 0198538642.
Stuart Russell  Peter Norvig, 2002. Artificial Intelligence  A Modern Approach. Prentice Hall, ISBN 0136042597.
Ray Solomonoff, An Inductive Inference Machine, IRE Convention Record, Section on Information Theory, Part 2, pp., 5662, 1957.
Ray Solomonoff, An Inductive Inference Machine A privately circulated report from the 1956 Dartmouth Summer Research Conference on AI.
External links
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Machine learning.
International Machine Learning Society
Popular online course by Andrew Ng, at Coursera. It uses GNU Octave. The course is a free version of Stanford Universitys actual course taught by Ng, whose lectures are also available for free.
mloss is an academic database of opensource machine learning software.
Machine Learning Crash Course by Google. This is a free course on machine learning through the use of TensorFlow.
Machine Learning with Python Course
vte
Major fields of computer science
Note: This template roughly follows the 2012 ACM Computing Classification System.
Hardware
Printed circuit board Peripheral Integrated circuit Very Large Scale Integration Systems on Chip SoCs Energy consumption Green computing Electronic design automation Hardware acceleration
Computer systems
organization
Computer architecture Embedded system Realtime computing Dependability
Networks
Network architecture Network protocol Network components Network scheduler Network performance evaluation Network service
Software organization
Interpreter Middleware Virtual machine Operating system Software quality
Software notations
and tools
Programming paradigm Programming language Compiler Domainspecific language Modeling language Software framework Integrated development environment Software configuration management Software library Software repository
Software development
Software development process Requirements analysis Software design Software construction Software deployment Software maintenance Programming team Opensource model
Theory of computation
Model of computation Formal language Automata theory Computational complexity theory Logic Semantics
Algorithms
Algorithm design Analysis of algorithms Algorithmic efficiency Randomized algorithm Computational geometry
Mathematics
of computing
Discrete mathematics Probability Statistics Mathematical software Information theory Mathematical analysis Numerical analysis
Information
systems
Database management system Information storage systems Enterprise information system Social information systems Geographic information system Decision support system Process control system Multimedia information system Data mining Digital library Computing platform Digital marketing World Wide Web Information retrieval
Security
Cryptography Formal methods Security services Intrusion detection system Hardware security Network security Information security Application security
Humancomputer
interaction
Interaction design Social computing Ubiquitous computing Visualization Accessibility
Concurrency
Concurrent computing Parallel computing Distributed computing Multithreading Multiprocessing
Artificial
intelligence
Natural language processing Knowledge representation and reasoning Computer vision Automated planning and scheduling Search methodology Control method Philosophy of artificial intelligence Distributed artificial intelligence
Machine learning
Supervised learning Unsupervised learning Reinforcement learning Multitask learning Crossvalidation
Graphics
Animation Rendering Image manipulation Graphics processing unit Mixed reality Virtual reality Image compression Solid modeling
Applied
computing
Ecommerce Enterprise software Computational mathematics Computational physics Computational chemistry Computational biology Computational social science Computational engineering Computational healthcare Digital art Electronic publishing Cyberwarfare Electronic voting Video games Word processing Operations research Educational technology Document management
Wikipedia book Book Category Category Portal Portal WikiProjectWikiProject Commons page Commons
Categories: Machine learningCyberneticsLearning

Quantum computing
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search

The Bloch sphere is a representation of a qubit, the fundamental building block of quantum computers.
Part of a series on
Quantum mechanics
displaystyle ihbar frac partial partial tpsi trangle hat Hpsi trangle  displaystyle ihbar frac partial partial tpsi trangle hat Hpsi trangle 
Schrdinger equation
Introduction Glossary History
Backgroundshow
Fundamentalsshow
Effectsshow
Experimentsshow
Formulationsshow
Equationsshow
Interpretationsshow
Advanced topicsshow
Scientistsshow
vte
Quantum computing is computing using quantummechanical phenomena, such as superposition and entanglement.1 A quantum computer is a device that performs quantum computing. Such a computer is different from binary digital electronic computers based on transistors. Whereas common digital computing requires that the data be encoded into binary digits bits, each of which is always in one of two definite states 0 or 1, quantum computation uses quantum bits or qubits, which can be in superpositions of states. A quantum Turing machine is a theoretical model of such a computer and is also known as the universal quantum computer. The field of quantum computing was initiated by the work of Paul Benioff2 and Yuri Manin in 1980,3 Richard Feynman in 1982,4 and David Deutsch in 1985.5

As of 2018, the development of actual quantum computers is still in its infancy, but experiments have been carried out in which quantum computational operations were executed on a very small number of quantum bits.6 Both practical and theoretical research continues, and many national governments and military agencies are funding quantum computing research in additional effort to develop quantum computers for civilian, business, trade, environmental and national security purposes, such as cryptanalysis.7 A small 20qubit quantum computer exists and is available for experiments via the IBM Quantum Experience project. DWave Systems has been developing their own version of a quantum computer that uses annealing.8

Largescale quantum computers would theoretically be able to solve certain problems much more quickly than any classical computers that use even the best currently known algorithms, like integer factorization using Shors algorithm which is a quantum algorithm and the simulation of quantum manybody systems. There exist quantum algorithms, such as Simons algorithm, that run faster than any possible probabilistic classical algorithm.9 A classical computer could in principle with exponential resources simulate a quantum algorithm, as quantum computation does not violate the ChurchTuring thesis.10:202 On the other hand, quantum computers may be able to efficiently solve problems which are not practically feasible on classical computers.


Contents
1Basics
2Principles of operation
3Operation
4Potential
4.1Cryptography
4.2Quantum search
4.3Quantum simulation
4.4Quantum annealing and adiabatic optimisation
4.5Solving linear equations
4.6Quantum supremacy
5Obstacles
5.1Quantum decoherence
6Developments
6.1Quantum computing models
6.2Physical realizations
6.3Timeline
7Relation to computational complexity theory
8See also
9References
10Further reading
11External links
Basics
A classical computer has a memory made up of bits, where each bit is represented by either a one or a zero. A quantum computer, on the other hand, maintains a sequence of qubits, which can represent a one, a zero, or any quantum superposition of those two qubit states;10:1316 a pair of qubits can be in any quantum superposition of 4 states,10:16 and three qubits in any superposition of 8 states. In general, a quantum computer with displaystyle n n qubits can be in an arbitrary superposition of up to displaystyle 2n 2n different states simultaneously.10:17 This compares to a normal computer that can only be in one of these displaystyle 2n 2n states at any one time.

A quantum computer operates on its qubits using quantum gates and measurement which also alters the observed state. An algorithm is composed of a fixed sequence of quantum logic gates and a problem is encoded by setting the initial values of the qubits, similar to how a classical computer works. The calculation usually ends with a measurement, collapsing the system of qubits into one of the displaystyle 2n 2n eigenstates, where each qubit is zero or one, decomposing into a classical state. The outcome can ,therefore, be at most displaystyle n n classical bits of information or, if the algorithm did not end with a measurement, the result is an unobserved quantum state.

Quantum algorithms are often probabilistic, in that they provide the correct solution only with a certain known probability.11 Note that the term nondeterministic computing must not be used in that case to mean probabilistic computing because the term nondeterministic has a different meaning in computer science.

An example of an implementation of qubits of a quantum computer could start with the use of particles with two spin states: down and up typically written displaystyle downarrow rangle  downarrow rangle  and displaystyle uparrow rangle  uparrow rangle , or displaystyle 0rangle  0rangle  and displaystyle 1rangle  1rangle . This is true because any such system can be mapped onto an effective spin12 system.

Principles of operation

This section includes a list of references, but its sources remain unclear because it has insufficient inline citations. Please help to improve this section by introducing more precise citations. February 2018 Learn how and when to remove this template message
A quantum computer with a given number of qubits is fundamentally different from a classical computer composed of the same number of classical bits. For example, representing the state of an nqubit system on a classical computer requires the storage of 2n complex coefficients, while to characterize the state of a classical nbit system it is sufficient to provide the values of the n bits, that is, only n numbers. Although this fact may seem to indicate that qubits can hold exponentially more information than their classical counterparts, care must be taken not to overlook the fact that the qubits are only in a probabilistic superposition of all of their states. This means that when the final state of the qubits is measured, they will only be found in one of the possible configurations they were in before the measurement. It is generally incorrect to think of a system of qubits as being in one particular state before the measurement. Since the fact that they were in a superposition of states before the measurement was made directly affects the possible outcomes of the computation.


Qubits are made up of controlled particles and the means of control e.g. devices that trap particles and switch them from one state to another.12
To better understand this point, consider a classical computer that operates on a threebit register. If the exact state of the register at a given time is not known, it can be described as a probability distribution over the displaystyle 238 238 different threebit strings 000, 001, 010, 011, 100, 101, 110, and 111. If there is no uncertainty over its state, then it is in exactly one of these states with probability 1. However, if it is a probabilistic computer, then there is a possibility of it being in any one of a number of different states.

The state of a threequbit quantum computer is similarly described by an eightdimensional vector displaystyle a0,a1,a2,a3,a4,a5,a6,a7 displaystyle a0,a1,a2,a3,a4,a5,a6,a7 or a one dimensional vector with each vector node holding the amplitude and the state as the bit string of qubits. Here, however, the coefficients displaystyle ai ai are complex numbers, and it is the sum of the squares of the coefficients absolute values, displaystyle sum iai2 displaystyle sum iai2, that must equal 1. For each displaystyle i i, the absolute value squared displaystyle leftairight2 displaystyle leftairight2 gives the probability of the system being found in the displaystyle i ith state after a measurement. However, because a complex number encodes not just a magnitude but also a direction in the complex plane, the phase difference between any two coefficients states represents a meaningful parameter. This is a fundamental difference between quantum computing and probabilistic classical computing.13

If you measure the three qubits, you will observe a threebit string. The probability of measuring a given string is the squared magnitude of that strings coefficient i.e., the probability of measuring 000  displaystyle a02 displaystyle a02, the probability of measuring 001  displaystyle a12 displaystyle a12, etc.. Thus, measuring a quantum state described by complex coefficients displaystyle a0,a1,a2,a3,a4,a5,a6,a7 displaystyle a0,a1,a2,a3,a4,a5,a6,a7 gives the classical probability distribution displaystyle a02,a12,a22,a32,a42,a52,a62,a72 displaystyle a02,a12,a22,a32,a42,a52,a62,a72 and we say that the quantum state collapses to a classical state as a result of making the measurement.

An eightdimensional vector can be specified in many different ways depending on what basis is chosen for the space. The basis of bit strings e.g., 000, 001, , 111 is known as the computational basis. Other possible bases are unitlength, orthogonal vectors and the eigenvectors of the Paulix operator. Ket notation is often used to make the choice of basis explicit. For example, the state displaystyle a0,a1,a2,a3,a4,a5,a6,a7 displaystyle a0,a1,a2,a3,a4,a5,a6,a7 in the computational basis can be written as:

displaystyle a0,000rangle a1,001rangle a2,010rangle a3,011rangle a4,100rangle a5,101rangle a6,110rangle a7,111rangle  displaystyle a0,000rangle a1,001rangle a2,010rangle a3,011rangle a4,100rangle a5,101rangle a6,110rangle a7,111rangle 
where, e.g., displaystyle 010rangle left0,0,1,0,0,0,0,0right displaystyle 010rangle left0,0,1,0,0,0,0,0right
The computational basis for a single qubit two dimensions is displaystyle 0rangle left1,0right 0rangle left1,0right and displaystyle 1rangle left0,1right 1rangle left0,1right.

Using the eigenvectors of the Paulix operator, a single qubit is displaystyle rangle tfrac 1sqrt 2left1,1right rangle tfrac 1sqrt 2left1,1right and displaystyle rangle tfrac 1sqrt 2left1,1right rangle tfrac 1sqrt 2left1,1right.

Operation

This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. February 2018 Learn how and when to remove this template message
Question dropshade.pngUnsolved problem in physics:
Is a universal quantum computer sufficient to efficiently simulate an arbitrary physical system?
more unsolved problems in physics
While a classical 3bit state and a quantum 3qubit state are each eightdimensional vectors, they are manipulated quite differently for classical or quantum computation. For computing in either case, the system must be initialized, for example into the allzeros string, displaystyle 000rangle  000rangle , corresponding to the vector 1,0,0,0,0,0,0,0. In classical randomized computation, the system evolves according to the application of stochastic matrices, which preserve that the probabilities add up to one i.e., preserve the L1 norm. In quantum computation, on the other hand, allowed operations are unitary matrices, which are effectively rotations they preserve that the sum of the squares add up to one, the Euclidean or L2 norm. Exactly what unitaries can be applied depend on the physics of the quantum device. Consequently, since rotations can be undone by rotating backward, quantum computations are reversible. Technically, quantum operations can be probabilistic combinations of unitaries, so quantum computation really does generalize classical computation. See quantum circuit for a more precise formulation.

Finally, upon termination of the algorithm, the result needs to be read off. In the case of a classical computer, we sample from the probability distribution on the threebit register to obtain one definite threebit string, say 000. Quantum mechanically, one measures the threequbit state, which is equivalent to collapsing the quantum state down to a classical distribution with the coefficients in the classical state being the squared magnitudes of the coefficients for the quantum state, as described above, followed by sampling from that distribution. This destroys the original quantum state. Many algorithms will only give the correct answer with a certain probability. However, by repeatedly initializing, running and measuring the quantum computers results, the probability of getting the correct answer can be increased. In contrast, counterfactual quantum computation allows the correct answer to be inferred when the quantum computer is not actually running in a technical sense, though earlier initialization and frequent measurements are part of the counterfactual computation protocol.

For more details on the sequences of operations used for various quantum algorithms, see universal quantum computer, Shors algorithm, Grovers algorithm, DeutschJozsa algorithm, amplitude amplification, quantum Fourier transform, quantum gate, quantum adiabatic algorithm and quantum error correction.

Potential
Cryptography
Integer factorization, which underpins the security of public key cryptographic systems, is believed to be computationally infeasible with an ordinary computer for large integers if they are the product of few prime numbers e.g., products of two 300digit primes.14 By comparison, a quantum computer could efficiently solve this problem using Shors algorithm to find its factors. This ability would allow a quantum computer to break many of the cryptographic systems in use today, in the sense that there would be a polynomial time in the number of digits of the integer algorithm for solving the problem. In particular, most of the popular public key ciphers are based on the difficulty of factoring integers or the discrete logarithm problem, both of which can be solved by Shors algorithm. In particular, the RSA, DiffieHellman, and elliptic curve DiffieHellman algorithms could be broken. These are used to protect secure Web pages, encrypted email, and many other types of data. Breaking these would have significant ramifications for electronic privacy and security.

However, other cryptographic algorithms do not appear to be broken by those algorithms.1516 Some publickey algorithms are based on problems other than the integer factorization and discrete logarithm problems to which Shors algorithm applies, like the McEliece cryptosystem based on a problem in coding theory.1517 Latticebased cryptosystems are also not known to be broken by quantum computers, and finding a polynomial time algorithm for solving the dihedral hidden subgroup problem, which would break many lattice based cryptosystems, is a wellstudied open problem.18 It has been proven that applying Grovers algorithm to break a symmetric secret key algorithm by brute force requires time equal to roughly 2n2 invocations of the underlying cryptographic algorithm, compared with roughly 2n in the classical case,19 meaning that symmetric key lengths are effectively halved: AES256 would have the same security against an attack using Grovers algorithm that AES128 has against classical bruteforce search see Key size. Quantum cryptography could potentially fulfill some of the functions of public key cryptography. Quantumbased cryptographic systems could ,therefore, be more secure than traditional systems against quantum hacking.20

Quantum search
Besides factorization and discrete logarithms, quantum algorithms offering a more than polynomial speedup over the best known classical algorithm have been found for several problems,21 including the simulation of quantum physical processes from chemistry and solid state physics, the approximation of Jones polynomials, and solving Pells equation. No mathematical proof has been found that shows that an equally fast classical algorithm cannot be discovered, although this is considered unlikely.22 For some problems, quantum computers offer a polynomial speedup. The most wellknown example of this is quantum database search, which can be solved by Grovers algorithm using quadratically fewer queries to the database than that are required by classical algorithms. In this case, the advantage is not only provable but also optimal, it has been shown that Grovers algorithm gives the maximal possible probability of finding the desired element for any number of oracle lookups. Several other examples of provable quantum speedups for query problems have subsequently been discovered, such as for finding collisions in twotoone functions and evaluating NAND trees.

Problems that can be addressed with Grovers algorithm have the following properties:

There is no searchable structure in the collection of possible answers,
The number of possible answers to check is the same as the number of inputs to the algorithm, and
There exists a boolean function which evaluates each input and determines whether it is the correct answer
For problems with all these properties, the running time of Grovers algorithm on a quantum computer will scale as the square root of the number of inputs or elements in the database, as opposed to the linear scaling of classical algorithms. A general class of problems to which Grovers algorithm can be applied 23 is Boolean satisfiability problem. In this instance, the database through which the algorithm is iterating is that of all possible answers. An example and possible application of this is a password cracker that attempts to guess the password or secret key for an encrypted file or system. Symmetric ciphers such as Triple DES and AES are particularly vulnerable to this kind of attack.24 This application of quantum computing is a major interest of government agencies.25

Quantum simulation
Since chemistry and nanotechnology rely on understanding quantum systems, and such systems are impossible to simulate in an efficient manner classically, many believe quantum simulation will be one of the most important applications of quantum computing.26 Quantum simulation could also be used to simulate the behavior of atoms and particles at unusual conditions such as the reactions inside a collider.27

Quantum annealing and adiabatic optimisation
Adiabatic quantum computation relies on the adiabatic theorem to undertake calculations. A system is placed in the ground state for a simple Hamiltonian, which is slowly evolved to a more complicated Hamiltonian whose ground state represents the solution to the problem in question. The adiabatic theorem states that if the evolution is slow enough the system will stay in its ground state at all times through the process.

Solving linear equations
The Quantum algorithm for linear systems of equations or HHL Algorithm, named after its discoverers Harrow, Hassidim, and Lloyd, is expected to provide speedup over classical counterparts.28

Quantum supremacy
John Preskill has introduced the term quantum supremacy to refer to the hypothetical speedup advantage that a quantum computer would have over a classical computer in a certain field.29 Google announced in 2017 that it expected to achieve quantum supremacy by the end of the year, and IBM says that the best classical computers will be beaten on some task within about five years.30 Quantum supremacy has not been achieved yet, and skeptics like Gil Kalai doubt that it will ever be.3132 Bill Unruh doubted the practicality of quantum computers in a paper published back in 1994.33 Paul Davies pointed out that a 400qubit computer would even come into conflict with the cosmological information bound implied by the holographic principle.34 Those such as Roger Schlafly have pointed out that the claimed theoretical benefits of quantum computing go beyond the proven theory of quantum mechanics and imply nonstandard interpretations, such as the manyworlds interpretation and negative probabilities. Schlafly maintains that the Born rule is just metaphysical fluff and that quantum mechanics does not rely on probability any more than other branches of science but simply calculates the expected values of observables. He also points out that arguments about Turing complexity cannot be run backwards.353637 Those who prefer Bayesian interpretations of quantum mechanics have questioned the physical nature of the mathematical abstractions employed.38

Obstacles
There are a number of technical challenges in building a largescale quantum computer, and thus far quantum computers have yet to solve a problem faster than a classical computer. David DiVincenzo, of IBM, listed the following requirements for a practical quantum computer:39

scalable physically to increase the number of qubits;
qubits that can be initialized to arbitrary values;
quantum gates that are faster than decoherence time;
universal gate set;
qubits that can be read easily.
Quantum decoherence
Main article: Quantum decoherence
One of the greatest challenges is controlling or removing quantum decoherence. This usually means isolating the system from its environment as interactions with the external world cause the system to decohere. However, other sources of decoherence also exist. Examples include the quantum gates, and the lattice vibrations and background thermonuclear spin of the physical system used to implement the qubits. Decoherence is irreversible, as it is effectively nonunitary, and is usually something that should be highly controlled, if not avoided. Decoherence times for candidate systems in particular, the transverse relaxation time T2 for NMR and MRI technology, also called the dephasing time, typically range between nanoseconds and seconds at low temperature.13 Currently, some quantum computers require their qubits to be cooled to 20 millikelvins in order to prevent significant decoherence.40

As a result, timeconsuming tasks may render some quantum algorithms inoperable, as maintaining the state of qubits for a long enough duration will eventually corrupt the superpositions.41

These issues are more difficult for optical approaches as the timescales are orders of magnitude shorter and an oftencited approach to overcoming them is optical pulse shaping. Error rates are typically proportional to the ratio of operating time to decoherence time, hence any operation must be completed much more quickly than the decoherence time.

As described in the Quantum threshold theorem, if the error rate is small enough, it is thought to be possible to use quantum error correction to suppress errors and decoherence. This allows the total calculation time to be longer than the decoherence time if the error correction scheme can correct errors faster than decoherence introduces them. An often cited figure for the required error rate in each gate for faulttolerant computation is 103, assuming the noise is depolarizing.

Meeting this scalability condition is possible for a wide range of systems. However, the use of error correction brings with it the cost of a greatly increased number of required qubits. The number required to factor integers using Shors algorithm is still polynomial, and thought to be between L and L2, where L is the number of qubits in the number to be factored; error correction algorithms would inflate this figure by an additional factor of L. For a 1000bit number, this implies a need for about 104 bits without error correction.42 With error correction, the figure would rise to about 107 bits. Computation time is about L2 or about 107 steps and at 1 MHz, about 10 seconds.

A very different approach to the stabilitydecoherence problem is to create a topological quantum computer with anyons, quasiparticles used as threads and relying on braid theory to form stable logic gates.4344

Developments
Quantum computing models
There are a number of quantum computing models, distinguished by the basic elements in which the computation is decomposed. The four main models of practical importance are:

Quantum gate array computation decomposed into a sequence of fewqubit quantum gates
Oneway quantum computer computation decomposed into a sequence of onequbit measurements applied to a highly entangled initial state or cluster state
Adiabatic quantum computer, based on quantum annealing computation decomposed into a slow continuous transformation of an initial Hamiltonian into a final Hamiltonian, whose ground states contain the solution45
Topological quantum computer46 computation decomposed into the braiding of anyons in a 2D lattice
The quantum Turing machine is theoretically important but the direct implementation of this model is not pursued. All four models of computation have been shown to be equivalent; each can simulate the other with no more than polynomial overhead.

Physical realizations
For physically implementing a quantum computer, many different candidates are being pursued, among them distinguished by the physical system used to realize the qubits:

Superconducting quantum computing4748 qubit implemented by the state of small superconducting circuits Josephson junctions
Trapped ion quantum computer qubit implemented by the internal state of trapped ions
Optical lattices qubit implemented by internal states of neutral atoms trapped in an optical lattice
Quantum dot computer, spinbased e.g. the LossDiVincenzo quantum computer49 qubit given by the spin states of trapped electrons
Quantum dot computer, spatialbased qubit given by electron position in double quantum dot50
Coupled Quantum Wire qubit implemented by a pair of Quantum Wires coupled by a Quantum Point Contact515253
Nuclear magnetic resonance on molecules in solution liquidstate NMR qubit provided by nuclear spins within the dissolved molecule
Solidstate NMR Kane quantum computers qubit realized by the nuclear spin state of phosphorus donors in silicon
Electronsonhelium quantum computers qubit is the electron spin
Cavity quantum electrodynamics CQED qubit provided by the internal state of trapped atoms coupled to highfinesse cavities
Molecular magnet54 qubit given by spin states
Fullerenebased ESR quantum computer qubit based on the electronic spin of atoms or molecules encased in fullerenes
Linear optical quantum computer qubits realized by processing states of different modes of light through linear elements e.g. mirrors, beam splitters and phase shifters55
Diamondbased quantum computer565758 qubit realized by the electronic or nuclear spin of nitrogenvacancy centers in diamond
BoseEinstein condensatebased quantum computer59
Transistorbased quantum computer  string quantum computers with entrainment of positive holes using an electrostatic trap
Rareearthmetaliondoped inorganic crystal based quantum computers6061 qubit realized by the internal electronic state of dopants in optical fibers
Metalliclike carbon nanospheres based quantum computers62
A large number of candidates demonstrates that the topic, in spite of rapid progress, is still in its infancy. There is also a vast amount of flexibility.

Timeline
Main article: Timeline of quantum computing
In 1959 Richard Feynman in his lecture Theres Plenty of Room at the Bottom states the possibility of using quantum effects for computation.

In 1980 Paul Benioff described quantum mechanical Hamiltonian models of computers63 and the Russian mathematician Yuri Manin motivated the development of quantum computers.64

In 1981, at a conference coorganized by MIT and IBM, physicist Richard Feynman urged the world to build a quantum computer. He said, Nature isnt classical, dammit, and if you want to make a simulation of nature, youd better make it quantum mechanical, and by golly, its a wonderful problem because it doesnt look so easy.65

In 1984, BB84 is published, the worlds first quantum cryptography protocol by IBM scientists Charles Bennett and Gilles Brassard.

In 1993, an international group of six scientists, including Charles Bennett, showed that perfect quantum teleportation is possible66 in principle, but only if the original is destroyed.

In 1994 Peter Shor, at ATTs Bell Labs discovered an important quantum algorithm, which allows a quantum computer to factor large integers exponentially much faster than the best known classical algorithm. Shors algorithm can theoretically break many of the publickey cryptosystems in use today.67 Its invention sparked a tremendous interest in quantum computers.

In 1996, The DiVincenzos criteria are published which is a list of conditions that are necessary for constructing a quantum computer proposed by the theoretical physicist David P. DiVincenzo in his 2000 paper The Physical Implementation of Quantum Computation.

In 2001, researchers demonstrated Shors algorithm to factor 15 using a 7qubit NMR computer.68

In 2005, researchers at the University of Michigan built a semiconductor chip ion trap. Such devices from standard lithography may point the way to scalable quantum computing.69

In 2009, researchers at Yale University created the first solidstate quantum processor. The twoqubit superconducting chip had artificial atom qubits made of a billion aluminum atoms that acted like a single atom that could occupy two states.7071

A team at the University of Bristol also created a silicon chip based on quantum optics, able to run Shors algorithm.72 Further developments were made in 2010.73 Springer publishes a journal Quantum Information Processing devoted to the subject.74

In February 2010, Digital Combinational Circuits like an adder, subtractor etc. are designed with the help of Symmetric Functions organized from different quantum gates.7576

In April 2011, a team of scientists from Australia and Japan made a breakthrough in quantum teleportation. They successfully transferred a complex set of quantum data with full transmission integrity, without affecting the qubits superpositions.7778


Photograph of a chip constructed by DWave Systems Inc. Mounted and wirebonded in a sample holder. The DWave processor is designed to use 128 superconducting logic elements that exhibit controllable and tunable coupling to perform operations.
In 2011, DWave Systems announced the first commercial quantum annealer, the DWave One, claiming a 128 qubit processor. On May 25, 2011, Lockheed Martin agreed to purchase a DWave One system.79 Lockheed and the University of Southern California USC will house the DWave One at the newly formed USC Lockheed Martin Quantum Computing Center.80 DWaves engineers designed the chips with an empirical approach, focusing on solving particular problems. Investors liked this more than academics, who said DWave had not demonstrated they really had a quantum computer. Criticism softened after a DWave paper in Nature, that proved the chips have some quantum properties.8182 Two published papers have suggested that the DWave machines operation can be explained classically, rather than requiring quantum models.8384 Later work showed that classical models are insufficient when all available data is considered.85 Experts remain divided on the ultimate classification of the DWave systems though their quantum behavior was established concretely with a demonstration of entanglement.86

During the same year, researchers at the University of Bristol created an allbulk optics system that ran a version of Shors algorithm to successfully factor 21.87

In September 2011 researchers proved quantum computers can be made with a Von Neumann architecture separation of RAM.88

In November 2011 researchers factorized 143 using 4 qubits.89

In February 2012 IBM scientists said that they had made several breakthroughs in quantum computing with superconducting integrated circuits.90

In April 2012 a multinational team of researchers from the University of Southern California, Delft University of Technology, the Iowa State University of Science and Technology, and the University of California, Santa Barbara, constructed a twoqubit quantum computer on a doped diamond crystal that can easily be scaled up and is functional at room temperature. Two logical qubit directions of electron spin and nitrogen kernels spin were used, with microwave impulses. This computer ran Grovers algorithm generating the right answer from the first try in 95 of cases.91

In September 2012, Australian researchers at the University of New South Wales said the worlds first quantum computer was just 5 to 10 years away, after announcing a global breakthrough enabling the manufacture of its memory building blocks. A research team led by Australian engineers created the first working qubit based on a single atom in silicon, invoking the same technological platform that forms the building blocks of modernday computers.9293

In October 2012, Nobel Prizes were presented to David J. Wineland and Serge Haroche for their basic work on understanding the quantum world, which may help make quantum computing possible.9495

In November 2012, the first quantum teleportation from one macroscopic object to another was reported by scientists at the University of Science and Technology of China in Hefei.9697

In December 2012, the first dedicated quantum computing software company, 1QBit was founded in Vancouver, BC.98 1QBit is the first company to focus exclusively on commercializing software applications for commercially available quantum computers, including the DWave Two. 1QBits research demonstrated the ability of superconducting quantum annealing processors to solve realworld problems.99

In February 2013, a new technique, boson sampling, was reported by two groups using photons in an optical lattice that is not a universal quantum computer but may be good enough for practical problems. Science Feb 15, 2013

In May 2013, Google announced that it was launching the Quantum Artificial Intelligence Lab, hosted by NASAs Ames Research Center, with a 512qubit DWave quantum computer. The USRA Universities Space Research Association will invite researchers to share time on it with the goal of studying quantum computing for machine learning.100 Google added that they had already developed some quantum machine learning algorithms and had learned some useful principles, such as that best results come from mixing quantum and classical computing.100

In early 2014 it was reported, based on documents provided by former NSA contractor Edward Snowden, that the U.S. National Security Agency NSA is running a 79.7 million research program titled Penetrating Hard Targets to develop a quantum computer capable of breaking vulnerable encryption.101

In 2014, a group of researchers from ETH Zrich, USC, Google ,and Microsoft reported a definition of quantum speedup, and were not able to measure quantum speedup with the DWave Two device, but did not explicitly rule it out.102103

In 2014, researchers at University of New South Wales used silicon as a protectant shell around qubits, making them more accurate, increasing the length of time they will hold information, and possibly making quantum computers easier to build.104

In April 2015 IBM scientists claimed two critical advances towards the realization of a practical quantum computer. They claimed the ability to detect and measure both kinds of quantum errors simultaneously, as well as a new, square quantum bit circuit design that could scale to larger dimensions.105

In October 2015, QuTech successfully conducts the Loopholefree Bell inequality violation test using electron spins separated by 1.3 kilometres.106

In October 2015 researchers at the University of New South Wales built a quantum logic gate in silicon for the first time.107

In December 2015 NASA publicly displayed the worlds first fully operational 15million quantum computer made by the Canadian company DWave at the Quantum Artificial Intelligence Laboratory at its Ames Research Center in Californias Moffett Field. The device was purchased in 2013 via a partnership with Google and Universities Space Research Association. The presence and use of quantum effects in the DWave quantum processing unit is more widely accepted.108 In some tests, it can be shown that the DWave quantum annealing processor outperforms Selbys algorithm.109 Only two of this computer have been made so far.

In May 2016, IBM Research announced110 that for the first time ever it is making quantum computing available to members of the public via the cloud, who can access and run experiments on IBMs quantum processor. The service is called the IBM Quantum Experience. The quantum processor is composed of five superconducting qubits and is housed at the IBM T. J. Watson Research Center in New York.

In August 2016, scientists at the University of Maryland successfully built the first reprogrammable quantum computer.111

In October 2016 Basel University described a variant of the electronhole based quantum computer, which instead of manipulating electron spins uses electron holes in a semiconductor at low mK temperatures which are a lot less vulnerable to decoherence. This has been dubbed the positronic quantum computer as the quasiparticle behaves like it has a positive electrical charge.112

In March 2017, IBM announced an industryfirst initiative to build commercially available universal quantum computing systems called IBM Q. The company also released a new API Application Program Interface for the IBM Quantum Experience that enables developers and programmers to begin building interfaces between its existing five quantum bit qubit cloudbased quantum computer and classical computers, without needing a deep background in quantum physics.

In May 2017, IBM announced113 that it has successfully built and tested its most powerful universal quantum computing processors. The first is a 16 qubit processor that will allow for more complex experimentation than the previously available 5 qubit processor. The second is IBMs first prototype commercial processor with 17 qubits and leverages significant materials, device, and architecture improvements to make it the most powerful quantum processor created to date by IBM.

In July 2017, a group of U.S. researchers announced a quantum simulator with 51 qubits. The announcement was made by Mikhail Lukin of Harvard University at the International Conference on Quantum Technologies in Moscow.114 A quantum simulator differs from a computer. Lukins simulator was designed to solve one equation. Solving a different equation would require building a new system. A computer can solve many different equations.

In September 2017, IBM Research scientists use a 7 qubit device to model the largest molecule,115 Beryllium hydride, ever by a quantum computer. The results were published as the cover story in the peerreviewed journal Nature.

In October 2017, IBM Research scientists successfully broke the 49qubit simulation barrier and simulated 49 and 56qubit shortdepth circuits, using the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratorys Vulcan supercomputer, and the University of Illinois Cyclops Tensor Framework originally developed at the University of California. The results were published in arxiv.116

In November 2017, the University of Sydney research team in Australia successfully made a microwave circulator, an important quantum computer part, 1000 times smaller than a conventional circulator by using topological insulators to slow down the speed of light in a material.117

In December 2017, IBM announced118 its first IBM Q Network clients. The companies, universities, and labs to explore practical quantum applications, using IBM Q 20 qubit commercial systems, for business and science include: JPMorgan Chase, Daimler AG, Samsung, JSR Corporation, Barclays, Hitachi Metals, Honda, Nagase, Keio University, Oak Ridge National Lab, Oxford University and University of Melbourne.

In December 2017, Microsoft released a preview version of a Quantum Development Kit.119 It includes a programming language, Q, which can be used to write programs that are run on an emulated quantum computer.

In 2017 DWave reported to start selling a 2000 qubit quantum computer.120

In late 2017 and early 2018 IBM,121 Intel,122 and Google123 each reported testing quantum processors containing 50, 49, and 72 qubits, respectively, all realized using superconducting circuits. By number of qubits, these circuits are approaching the range in which simulating their quantum dynamics is expected to become prohibitive on classical computers, although it has been argued that further improvements in error rates are needed to put classical simulation out of reach.124

In February 2018, scientists reported, for the first time, the discovery of a new form of light, which may involve polaritons, that could be useful in the development of quantum computers.125126

In February 2018, QuTech reported successfully testing a siliconbased twospinqubits quantum processor.127

In June 2018, Intel begins testing siliconbased spinqubit processor, manufactured in the companys D1D Fab in Oregon.128

In July 2018, a team led by the University of Sydney has achieved the worlds first multiqubit demonstration of a quantum chemistry calculation performed on a system of trapped ions, one of the leading hardware platforms in the race to develop a universal quantum computer.129

Relation to computational complexity theory
Main article: Quantum complexity theory

The suspected relationship of BQP to other problem spaces.130
The class of problems that can be efficiently solved by quantum computers is called BQP, for bounded error, quantum, polynomial time. Quantum computers only run probabilistic algorithms, so BQP on quantum computers is the counterpart of BPP bounded error, probabilistic, polynomial time on classical computers. It is defined as the set of problems solvable with a polynomialtime algorithm, whose probability of error is bounded away from one half.131 A quantum computer is said to solve a problem if, for every instance, its answer will be right with high probability. If that solution runs in polynomial time, then that problem is in BQP.

BQP is contained in the complexity class P or more precisely in the associated class of decision problems PP,132 which is a subclass of PSPACE.

BQP is suspected to be disjoint from NPcomplete and a strict superset of P, but that is not known. Both integer factorization and discrete log are in BQP. Both of these problems are NP problems suspected to be outside BPP, and hence outside P. Both are suspected to not be NPcomplete. There is a common misconception that quantum computers can solve NPcomplete problems in polynomial time. That is not known to be true, and is generally suspected to be false.132

The capacity of a quantum computer to accelerate classical algorithms has rigid limitsupper bounds of quantum computations complexity. The overwhelming part of classical calculations cannot be accelerated on a quantum computer.133 A similar fact takes place for particular computational tasks, like the search problem, for which Grovers algorithm is optimal.134

Bohmian Mechanics is a nonlocal hidden variable interpretation of quantum mechanics. It has been shown that a nonlocal hidden variable quantum computer could implement a search of an Nitem database at most in displaystyle Osqrt3N displaystyle Osqrt3N steps. This is slightly faster than the displaystyle Osqrt N Osqrt  N steps taken by Grovers algorithm. Neither search method will allow quantum computers to solve NPComplete problems in polynomial time.135

Although quantum computers may be faster than classical computers for some problem types, those described above cannot solve any problem that classical computers cannot already solve. A Turing machine can simulate these quantum computers, so such a quantum computer could never solve an undecidable problem like the halting problem. The existence of standard quantum computers does not disprove the ChurchTuring thesis.136 It has been speculated that theories of quantum gravity, such as Mtheory or loop quantum gravity, may allow even faster computers to be built. Currently, defining computation in such theories is an open problem due to the problem of time, i.e., there currently exists no obvious way to describe what it means for an observer to submit input to a computer and later receive output.13779

See also
Chemical computer
DNA computing
Electronic quantum holography
Intelligence Advanced Research Projects Activity
Kane quantum computer
List of emerging technologies
List of quantum processors
Natural computing
Normal mode
Photonic computing
Postquantum cryptography
Quantum annealing
Quantum bus
Quantum cognition
Quantum gate
Quantum machine learning
Quantum threshold theorem
Soliton
Theoretical computer science
Timeline of quantum computing
Topological quantum computer
Valleytronics
Quantum Computing portal
References
 Gershenfeld, Neil; Chuang, Isaac L. June 1998. Quantum Computing with Molecules PDF. Scientific American.
 Benioff, Paul 1980. The computer as a physical system: A microscopic quantum mechanical Hamiltonian model of computers as represented by Turing machines. Journal of Statistical Physics. 22 5: 563591. Bibcode:1980JSP....22..563B. doi:10.1007BF01011339.
 Manin, Yu. I. 1980. Vychislimoe i nevychislimoe Computable and Noncomputable in Russian. Sov.Radio. pp. 1315. Archived from the original on 20130510. Retrieved 20130304.
 Feynman, R. P.u 1982. Simulating physics with computers PDF. International Journal of Theoretical Physics. 21 6: 467488. Bibcode:1982IJTP...21..467F. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.45.9310. doi:10.1007BF02650179.
 Deutsch, David 1985. Quantum Theory, the ChurchTuring Principle and the Universal Quantum Computer. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London A. 400 1818: 97117. Bibcode:1985RSPSA.400...97D. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.144.7936. doi:10.1098rspa.1985.0070.
 Gershon, Eric 20130114. New qubit control bodes well for future of quantum computing. Phys.org. Retrieved 20141026.
 Quantum Information Science and Technology Roadmap for a sense of where the research is heading.
 Explaining the upside and downside of DWaves new quantum computer. 20170126.
 Simon, D.R. 1994. On the power of quantum computation. Foundations of Computer Science, 1994 Proceedings., 35th Annual Symposium on. pp. 116123. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.655.4355. doi:10.1109SFCS.1994.365701. ISBN 9780818665806.
 Nielsen, Michael A.; Chuang, Isaac L. 2010. Quantum Computation and Quantum Information 2nd ed.. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9781107002173.
 Preskill, John 2015. Lecture Notes for Ph219CS219: Quantum Information Chapter 5 PDF. p. 12.
 Waldner, JeanBaptiste 2007. Nanocomputers and Swarm Intelligence. London: ISTE. p. 157. ISBN 9782746215160.
 DiVincenzo, David P. 1995. Quantum Computation. Science. 270 5234: 255261. Bibcode:1995Sci...270..255D. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.242.2165. doi:10.1126science.270.5234.255. subscription required
 Lenstra, Arjen K. 2000. Integer Factoring PDF. Designs, Codes and Cryptography. 19 23: 101128. doi:10.1023A:1008397921377. Archived from the original PDF on 20150410.
 Daniel J. Bernstein, Introduction to PostQuantum Cryptography. Introduction to Daniel J. Bernstein, Johannes Buchmann, Erik Dahmen editors. Postquantum cryptography. Springer, Berlin, 2009. ISBN 9783540887010
 See also pqcrypto.org, a bibliography maintained by Daniel J. Bernstein and Tanja Lange on cryptography not known to be broken by quantum computing.
 Robert J. McEliece. A publickey cryptosystem based on algebraic coding theory. Jet Propulsion Laboratory DSN Progress Report 4244, 114116.
 Kobayashi, H.; Gall, F.L. 2006. Dihedral Hidden Subgroup Problem: A Survey. Information and Media Technologies. 1 1: 178185.permanent dead link
 Bennett C.H., Bernstein E., Brassard G., Vazirani U., The strengths and weaknesses of quantum computation. SIAM Journal on Computing 265: 15101523 1997.
 What are quantum computers and how do they work? WIRED explains. Wired UK. 20180216.
 Quantum Algorithm Zoo  Stephen Jordans Homepage
 Jon Schiller, Phd 20090619. Quantum Computers. ISBN 9781439243497.
 Ambainis, Andris 2005. Quantum search algorithms. arXiv:quantph0504012.
 Mavroeidis, Vasileios; Vishi, Kamer; d, Mateusz; Jsang, Audun March 2018. The Impact of Quantum Computing on Present Cryptography. International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications. 9 3. arXiv:1804.00200. doi:10.14569IJACSA.2018.090354.
 Rich, Steven; Gellman, Barton 20140201. NSA seeks to build quantum computer that could crack most types of encryption. Washington Post.
 Norton, Quinn 20070215. The Father of Quantum Computing. Wired.
 Ambainis, Andris Spring 2014. What Can We Do with a Quantum Computer?. Institute for Advanced Study.
 Ambainis, Andris; Hassidim, Avinatan; Lloyd, Seth 2008. Quantum algorithm for solving linear systems of equations. Physical Review Letters. 103 15: 150502. arXiv:0811.3171. doi:10.1103PhysRevLett.103.150502. PMID 19905613.
 Boixo, Sergio; Isakov, Sergei V.; Smelyanskiy, Vadim N.; Babbush, Ryan; Ding, Nan; Jiang, Zhang; Bremner, Michael J.; Martinis, John M.; Neven, Hartmut 2018. Characterizing Quantum Supremacy in NearTerm Devices. Nature Physics. 14 6: 595600. arXiv:1608.00263. doi:10.1038s415670180124x.
 Savage, Neil. Quantum Computers Compete for Supremacy.
 Quantum Supremacy and Complexity. 23 April 2016.
 Kalai, Gil. The Quantum Computer Puzzle PDF. AMS.
 Unruh, Bill 1995. Maintaining coherence in Quantum Computers. Physical Review A. 51 2: 992997. arXiv:hepth9406058. Bibcode:1995PhRvA..51..992U. doi:10.1103PhysRevA.51.992.
 Davies, Paul. The implications of a holographic universe for quantum information science and the nature of physical law PDF. Macquarie University.
 Schlafly, Roger. Concise argument against quantum computing. Dark Buzz.
 Schlafly, Roger. Impossibility of quantum computers. Dark Buzz.
 Schlafly, Roger. No quantum probabilities needed. Dark Buzz.
 Hestenes, David. Hunting for Snarks in Quantum Mechanics PDF. Arizona State University.
 DiVincenzo, David P. 20000413. The Physical Implementation of Quantum Computation. Fortschritte der Physik. 48 911: 771783. arXiv:quantph0002077. Bibcode:2000ForPh..48..771D. doi:10.10021521397820000948:911771::AIDPROP7713.0.CO;2E.
 Jones, Nicola 19 June 2013. Computing: The quantum company. Nature. 498 7454: 286288. Bibcode:2013Natur.498..286J. doi:10.1038498286a. PMID 23783610.
 Amy, Matthew; Matteo, Olivia; Gheorghiu, Vlad; Mosca, Michele; Parent, Alex; Schanck, John November 30, 2016. Estimating the cost of generic quantum preimage attacks on SHA2 and SHA3. arXiv:1603.09383 quantph.
 Dyakonov, M. I. 20061014. S. Luryi; J. Xu; A. Zaslavsky, eds. Is FaultTolerant Quantum Computation Really Possible?. Future Trends in Microelectronics. Up the Nano Creek: 418. arXiv:quantph0610117. Bibcode:2006quant.ph.10117D.
 Freedman, Michael H.; Kitaev, Alexei; Larsen, Michael J.; Wang, Zhenghan 2003. Topological quantum computation. Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society. 40 1: 3138. arXiv:quantph0101025. doi:10.1090S0273097902009643. MR 1943131.
 Monroe, Don 20081001. Anyons: The breakthrough quantum computing needs?. New Scientist.
 Das, A.; Chakrabarti, B. K. 2008. Quantum Annealing and Analog Quantum Computation. Rev. Mod. Phys. 80 3: 10611081. arXiv:0801.2193. Bibcode:2008RvMP...80.1061D. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.563.9990. doi:10.1103RevModPhys.80.1061.
 Nayak, Chetan; Simon, Steven; Stern, Ady; Das Sarma, Sankar 2008. Nonabelian Anyons and Quantum Computation. Rev Mod Phys. 80 3: 10831159. arXiv:0707.1889. Bibcode:2008RvMP...80.1083N. doi:10.1103RevModPhys.80.1083.
 Clarke, John; Wilhelm, Frank June 19, 2008. Superconducting quantum bits. Nature. 453 7198: 10311042. Bibcode:2008Natur.453.1031C. doi:10.1038nature07128. PMID 18563154.
 Kaminsky, William M 2004. Scalable Superconducting Architecture for Adiabatic Quantum Computation. arXiv:quantph0403090.
 Imamolu, Atac; Awschalom, D. D.; Burkard, Guido; DiVincenzo, D. P.; Loss, D.; Sherwin, M.; Small, A. 1999. Quantum information processing using quantum dot spins and cavityQED. Physical Review Letters. 83 20: 42044207. arXiv:quantph9904096. Bibcode:1999PhRvL..83.4204I. doi:10.1103PhysRevLett.83.4204.
 Fedichkin, Leonid; Yanchenko, Maxim; Valiev, Kamil 2000. Novel coherent quantum bit using spatial quantization levels in semiconductor quantum dot. Quantum Computers and Computing. 1: 5876. arXiv:quantph0006097. Bibcode:2000quant.ph..6097F. Archived from the original on 20110818.
 Bertoni, A.; Bordone, P.; Brunetti, R.; Jacoboni, C.; Reggiani, S. 20000619. Quantum Logic Gates based on Coherent Electron Transport in Quantum Wires. Physical Review Letters. 84 25: 59125915. Bibcode:2000PhRvL..84.5912B. doi:10.1103PhysRevLett.84.5912. PMID 10991086.
 Ionicioiu, Radu; Amaratunga, Gehan; Udrea, Florin 20010120. Quantum Computation with Ballistic Electrons. International Journal of Modern Physics B. 15 2: 125133. arXiv:quantph0011051. Bibcode:2001IJMPB..15..125I. doi:10.1142s0217979201003521. ISSN 02179792.
 Ramamoorthy, A.; Bird, J. P.; Reno, J. L. 2007. Using splitgate structures to explore the implementation of a coupledelectronwaveguide qubit scheme. Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter. 19 27: 276205. Bibcode:2007JPCM...19A6205R. doi:10.1088095389841927276205. ISSN 09538984.
 Leuenberger, MN; Loss, D Apr 12, 2001. Quantum computing in molecular magnets. Nature. 410 6830: 78993. arXiv:condmat0011415. Bibcode:2001Natur.410..789L. doi:10.103835071024. PMID 11298441.
 Knill, G. J.; Laflamme, R.; Milburn, G. J. 2001. A scheme for efficient quantum computation with linear optics. Nature. 409 6816: 4652. Bibcode:2001Natur.409...46K. doi:10.103835051009. PMID 11343107.
 Nizovtsev, A. P. August 2005. A quantum computer based on NV centers in diamond: Optically detected nutations of single electron and nuclear spins. Optics and Spectroscopy. 99 2: 248260. Bibcode:2005OptSp..99..233N. doi:10.11341.2034610.
 Gruener, Wolfgang 20070601. Research indicates diamonds could be key to quantum storage. Archived from the original on 20070604. Retrieved 20070604.
 Neumann, P.; et al. June 6, 2008. Multipartite Entanglement Among Single Spins in Diamond. Science. 320 5881: 13261329. Bibcode:2008Sci...320.1326N. doi:10.1126science.1157233. PMID 18535240.
 Millman, Rene 20070803. Trapped atoms could advance quantum computing. ITPro. Archived from the original on 20070927. Retrieved 20070726.
 Ohlsson, N.; Mohan, R. K.; Krll, S. January 1, 2002. Quantum computer hardware based on rareearthiondoped inorganic crystals. Opt. Commun. 201 13: 7177. Bibcode:2002OptCo.201...71O. doi:10.1016S0030401801016662.
 Longdell, J. J.; Sellars, M. J.; Manson, N. B. September 23, 2004. Demonstration of conditional quantum phase shift between ions in a solid. Phys. Rev. Lett. 93 13: 130503. arXiv:quantph0404083. Bibcode:2004PhRvL..93m0503L. doi:10.1103PhysRevLett.93.130503. PMID 15524694.
 Nfrdi, Blint; Choucair, Mohammad; Dinse, KlausPeter; Forr, Lszl July 18, 2016. Room Temperature manipulation of long lifetime spins in metalliclike carbon nanospheres. Nature Communications. 7: 12232. arXiv:1611.07690. Bibcode:2016NatCo...712232N. doi:10.1038ncomms12232. PMC 4960311. PMID 27426851.
 Benioff, Paul 1980. The computer as a physical system: A microscopic quantum mechanical Hamiltonian model of computers as represented by Turing machines. Journal of Statistical Physics. 22 5: 563591. Bibcode:1980JSP....22..563B. doi:10.1007bf01011339.
 Manin, Yu I 1980. Vychislimoe i nevychislimoe Computable and Noncomputable. Sov.Radio in Russian. pp. 1315. Archived from the original on May 10, 2013. Retrieved October 20, 2017.
 Gil, Dario May 4, 2016. The Dawn of Quantum Computing is Upon Us. Retrieved May 4, 2016.
 Bennett,, C. H. 29 March 1993. Teleporting an unknown quantum state via dual classical and EinsteinPodolskyRosen channels PDF. Physical Review Letters. 70 13: 18951899. Bibcode:1993PhRvL..70.1895B. doi:10.1103PhysRevLett.70.1895. PMID 10053414.
 Ekert, Artur; Josza, Richard 1996. Quantum computation and Shors factoring algorithm. Rev. Mod. Phys. 68 3: 733753. doi:10.1103RevModPhys.68.733.
 Vandersypen, Lieven M. K.; Steffen, Matthias; Breyta, Gregory; Yannoni, Costantino S.; Sherwood, Mark H.; Chuang, Isaac L. 2001. Experimental realization of Shors quantum factoring algorithm using nuclear magnetic resonance. Nature. 414 6866: 8837. arXiv:quantph0112176. Bibcode:2001Natur.414..883V. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.251.8799. doi:10.1038414883a. PMID 11780055.
 UM develops scalable and massproducible quantum computer chip. University of Michigan. 20051212. Retrieved 20061117.
 DiCarlo, L.; Chow, J. M.; Gambetta, J. M.; Bishop, Lev S.; Johnson, B. R.; Schuster, D. I.; Majer, J.; Blais, A.; Frunzio, L.; S. M. Girvin; R. J. Schoelkopf 9 July 2009. Demonstration of twoqubit algorithms with a superconducting quantum processor PDF. Nature. 460 7252: 2404. arXiv:0903.2030. Bibcode:2009Natur.460..240D. doi:10.1038nature08121. PMID 19561592. Retrieved 20090702.
 Scientists Create First Electronic Quantum Processor. Yale University. 20090702. Archived from the original on 20100611. Retrieved 20090702.
 Codebreaking quantum algorithm runs on a silicon chip. New Scientist. 20090904. Retrieved 20091014.
 New Trends in Quantum Computation. Simons Conference on New Trends in Quantum Computation 2010: Program. C.N. Yang Institute for Theoretical Physics.
 Quantum Information Processing. Springer.com. Retrieved on 20110519.
 Bhattacharjee, Pijush Kanti 2010. Digital Combinational Circuits Design by QCA Gates PDF. International Journal of Computer and Electrical Engineering. 2 1: 6772.
 Bhattacharjee, Pijush Kanti 2010. Digital Combinational Circuits Design with the Help of Symmetric Functions Considering Heat Dissipation by Each QCA Gate PDF. International Journal of Computer and Electrical Engineering. 2 4: 666672.
 Quantum teleporter breakthrough. University of New South Wales. 20110415. Archived from the original on 20110418.
 Lai, Richard 20110418. First light wave quantum teleportation achieved, opens door to ultra fast data transmission. Engadget.
 DWave Systems sells its first Quantum Computing System to Lockheed Martin Corporation. DWave. 20110525. Retrieved 20110530.
 Operational Quantum Computing Center Established at USC. University of Southern California. 20111029. Retrieved 20111206.
 Johnson, M. W.; Amin, M. H. S.; Gildert, S.; Lanting, T.; Hamze, F.; Dickson, N.; Harris, R.; Berkley, A. J.; Johansson, J.; Bunyk, P.; Chapple, E. M.; Enderud, C.; Hilton, J. P.; Karimi, K.; Ladizinsky, E.; Ladizinsky, N.; Oh, T.; Perminov, I.; Rich, C.; Thom, M. C.; Tolkacheva, E.; Truncik, C. J. S.; Uchaikin, S.; Wang, J.; Wilson, B.; Rose, G. 12 May 2011. Quantum annealing with manufactured spins. Nature. 473 7346: 194198. Bibcode:2011Natur.473..194J. doi:10.1038nature10012. PMID 21562559.
 Simonite, Tom October 4, 2012. The CIA and Jeff Bezos Bet on Quantum Computing. Technology Review.
 Seung Woo Shin; Smith, Graeme; Smolin, John A.; Vazirani, Umesh 20140502. How Quantum is the DWave Machine?. arXiv:1401.7087 quantph.
 Boixo, Sergio; Rnnow, Troels F.; Isakov, Sergei V.; Wang, Zhihui; Wecker, David; Lidar, Daniel A.; Martinis, John M.; Troyer, Matthias 2014. Quantum Annealing With More Than 100 Qbits. Nature Physics. 10 3: 218224. arXiv:1304.4595. Bibcode:2014NatPh..10..218B. doi:10.1038nphys2900.
 Albash, Tameem; Rnnow, Troels F.; Troyer, Matthias; Lidar, Daniel A. 20140912. Reexamining classical and quantum models for the DWave One processor. The European Physical Journal Special Topics. 224 111: 111129. arXiv:1409.3827. Bibcode:2015EPJST.224..111A. doi:10.1140epjste2015023460.
 Lanting, T.; Przybysz, A. J.; Smirnov, A. Yu.; Spedalieri, F. M.; Amin, M. H.; Berkley, A. J.; Harris, R.; Altomare, F.; Boixo, S.; Bunyk, P.; Dickson, N.; Enderud, C.; Hilton, J. P.; Hoskinson, E.; Johnson, M. W.; Ladizinsky, E.; Ladizinsky, N.; Neufeld, R.; Oh, T.; Perminov, I.; Rich, C.; Thom, M. C.; Tolkacheva, E.; Uchaikin, S.; Wilson, A. B.; Rose, G. 20140529. Entanglement in a quantum annealing processor. Physical Review X. 4 2: 021041. arXiv:1401.3500. Bibcode:2014PhRvX...4b1041L. doi:10.1103PhysRevX.4.021041.
 Lopez, Enrique Martin; Laing, Anthony; Lawson, Thomas; Alvarez, Roberto; Zhou, XiaoQi; OBrien, Jeremy L. 2012. Implementation of an iterative quantum order finding algorithm. Nature Photonics. 6 11: 773776. arXiv:1111.4147. Bibcode:2012NaPho...6..773M. doi:10.1038nphoton.2012.259.
 Mariantoni, Matteo; Wang, H.; Yamamoto, T.; Neeley, M.; Bialczak, Radoslaw C.; Chen, Y.; Lenander, M.; Lucero, Erik; OConnell, A. D.; Sank, D.; Weides, M.; Wenner, J.; Yin, Y.; Zhao, J.; Korotkov, A. N.; Cleland, A. N.; Martinis, John M. 2011. Quantum computer with Von Neumann architecture. Science. 334 6052: 6165. arXiv:1109.3743. Bibcode:2011Sci...334...61M. doi:10.1126science.1208517. PMID 21885732.
 Xu, Nanyang; Zhu, Jing; Lu, Dawei; Zhou, Xianyi; Peng, Xinhua; Du, Jiangfeng 2011. Quantum Factorization of 143 on a DipolarCoupling NMR system. Physical Review Letters. 109 26: 269902. arXiv:1111.3726. Bibcode:2012PhRvL.109z9902X. doi:10.1103PhysRevLett.109.269902.
 IBM Says Its On the Cusp of Building a Quantum Computer. PCMAG. Retrieved 20141026.
 Quantum computer built inside diamond. Futurity. 20120409. Retrieved 20141026.
 Australian engineers write quantum computer qubit in global breakthrough. The Australian. Retrieved 20121003.
 Breakthrough in bid to create first quantum computer. University of New South Wales. 20120919. Retrieved 20121003.
 Frank, Adam October 14, 2012. Cracking the Quantum Safe. The New York Times. Retrieved 20121014.
 Overbye, Dennis October 9, 2012. A Nobel for Teasing Out the Secret Life of Atoms. The New York Times. Retrieved 20121014.
 First Teleportation from One Macroscopic Object to Another: The Physics arXiv Blog. MIT Technology Review. November 15, 2012. Retrieved 20121117.
 Bao, XiaoHui; Xu, XiaoFan; Li, CheMing; Yuan, ZhenSheng; Lu, ChaoYang; Pan, Jianwei November 13, 2012. Quantum teleportation between remote atomicensemble quantum memories. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 109 50: 2034720351. arXiv:1211.2892. Bibcode:2012PNAS..10920347B. doi:10.1073pnas.1207329109. PMC 3528515. PMID 23144222.
 1QBit Founded. 1QBit.com. Retrieved 20140622.
 1QBit Research. 1QBit.com. Retrieved 20140622.
 Launching the Quantum Artificial Intelligence Lab. ResearchGoogle Blog. Retrieved 20130516. Weve already developed some quantum machine learning algorithms. One produces very compact, efficient recognizers  very useful when youre short on power, as on a mobile device. Another can handle highly polluted training data, where a high percentage of the examples are mislabeled, as they often are in the real world. And weve learned some useful principles: e.g., you get the best results not with pure quantum computing, but by mixing quantum and classical computing.
 NSA seeks to build quantum computer that could crack most types of encryption. Washington Post. January 2, 2014.
 Ambainis, Andris; Wang, Z.; Job, J.; Boixo, S.; Isakov, S. V.; Wecker, D.; Martinis, J. M.; Lidar, D. A.; Troyer, M. 2014. Defining and detecting quantum speedup. Science. 345 6195: 420424. arXiv:1401.2910v1. doi:10.1126science.1252319. PMID 25061205.
 Quantum Chaos: After a Failed Speed Test, the DWave Debate Continues. Scientific American. 20140619.
 Gaudin, Sharon 23 October 2014. Researchers use silicon to push quantum computing toward reality. Computer World.
 IBM achieves critical steps to first quantum computer. www03.ibm.com. 29 April 2015.
 Hensen, B. Loopholefree Bell inequality violation using electron spins separated by 1.3 kilometres. Nature.
 Condliffe, Jamie. Worlds First Silicon Quantum Logic Gate Brings Quantum Computing One Step Closer.
 3Q: Scott Aaronson on Googles new quantumcomputing paper. MIT News. Retrieved 20160105.
 Ambainis, Andris 2015. Benchmarking a quantum annealing processor with the timetotarget metric. arXiv:1508.05087 quantph.
 IBM Makes Quantum Computing Available on IBM Cloud to Accelerate Innovation. May 4, 2016. Retrieved May 4, 2016.
 MacDonald, Fiona. Researchers have built the first reprogrammable quantum computer. ScienceAlert. Retrieved 8 August 2016.
 A new Type of Quantum Bit. www.unibas.ch.
 IBM Builds Its Most Powerful Universal Quantum Computing Processors. 17 May 2017. Retrieved 17 May 2017.
 Reynolds, Matt. Quantum simulator with 51 qubits is largest ever. New Scientist. Retrieved 23 July 2017.
 IBM Pioneers New Approach to Simulate Chemistry with Quantum Computing. 13 September 2017. Retrieved 13 September 2017.
 Pednault, Edwin; Gunnels, John A; Nannicini, Giacomo; Horesh, Lior; Magerlein, Thomas; Solomonik, Edgar; Wisnieff, Robert 16 October 2017. Breaking the 49Qubit Barrier in the Simulation of Quantum Circuits. arXiv:1710.05867 quantph.
 Key component for quantum computing invented: University of Sydney team develop microcircuit based on Nobel Prize research.
 IBM Announces Collaboration with Leading Fortune 500 Companies, Academic Institutions and National Research Labs to Accelerate Quantum Computing. 14 November 2017. Retrieved 14 December 2017.
 Microsoft Mechanics 11 December 2017. Microsoft Quantum Development Kit: Introduction and stepbystep demo  via YouTube.
 Temperton, James 26 January 2017. Got a spare 15 million? Why not buy your very own DWave quantum computer. Wired. Retrieved 13 May 2018.
 Will Knight 20171110. IBM Raises the Bar with a 50Qubit Quantum Computer. MIT Technology Review. Retrieved 20171213.
 Hsu, Jeremy January 9, 2018. CES 2018: Intels 49Qubit Chip Shoots for Quantum Supremacy. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers. Retrieved July 5, 2018.
 Susan Curtis 20180306. Google aims for quantum supremacy. PhysicsWorld. Retrieved 20180912.
 Tom Simonite 20180519. Google, Alibaba Spar Over Timeline for Quantum Supremacy. Wired. Retrieved 20180912.
 Hignett, Katherine 16 February 2018. Physics Creates New Form Of Light That Could Drive The Quantum Computing Revolution. Newsweek. Retrieved 17 February 2018.
 Liang, QiYu; et al. 16 February 2018. Observation of threephoton bound states in a quantum nonlinear medium. Science. 359 6377: 783786. arXiv:1709.01478. Bibcode:2018Sci...359..783L. doi:10.1126science.aao7293. PMID 29449489. Retrieved 17 February 2018.
 Giles, Martin February 15, 2018. Oldfashioned silicon might be the key to building ubiquitous quantum computers. MIT Technology Review. Retrieved July 5, 2018.
 Forrest, Conner June 12, 2018. Why Intels smallest spin qubit chip could be a turning point in quantum computing. TechRepublic. Retrieved July 12, 2018.
 Worldfirst quantum computer simulation of chemical bonds using trapped ions: Quantum chemistry expected to be one of the first applications of fullscale quantum computers. ScienceDaily. Retrieved 20180813.
 Nielsen, p. 42
 Nielsen, p. 41
 Bernstein, Ethan; Vazirani, Umesh 1997. Quantum Complexity Theory. SIAM Journal on Computing. 26 5: 14111473. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.144.7852. doi:10.1137S0097539796300921.
 Ozhigov, Yuri 1999. Quantum Computers Speed Up Classical with Probability Zero. Chaos, Solitons  Fractals. 10 10: 17071714. arXiv:quantph9803064. Bibcode:1998quant.ph..3064O. doi:10.1016S0960077998002264.
 Ozhigov, Yuri 1999. Lower Bounds of Quantum Search for Extreme Point. Proceedings of the London Royal Society. A455 1986: 21652172. arXiv:quantph9806001. Bibcode:1999RSPSA.455.2165O. doi:10.1098rspa.1999.0397.
 Aaronson, Scott. Quantum Computing and Hidden Variables PDF.
 Nielsen, p. 126
 Scott Aaronson 2005. NPcomplete Problems and Physical Reality. ACM SIGACT News, March. 2005. arXiv:quantph0502072. Bibcode:2005quant.ph..2072A. See section 7 Quantum Gravity:  to anyone who wants a test or benchmark for a favorite quantum gravity theory,authors footnote: That is, one without all the bother of making numerical predictions and comparing them to observation let me humbly propose the following: can you define Quantum Gravity PolynomialTime?  until we can say what it means for a user to specify an input and later receive an outputthere is no such thing as computation, not even theoretically. emphasis in original
Further reading
Nielsen, Michael; Chuang, Isaac 2000. Quantum Computation and Quantum Information. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9780521635035. OCLC 174527496.
Dibyendu Chatterjee; Arijit Roy 2015. A transmonbased quantum halfadder scheme. Progress of Theoretical and Experimental Physics. 2015 9: 093A0216pages. Bibcode:2015PTEP.2015i3A02C. doi:10.1093ptepptv122.
Abbot, Derek; Doering, Charles R.; Caves, Carlton M.; Lidar, Daniel M.; Brandt, Howard E.; Hamilton, Alexander R.; Ferry, David K.; GeaBanacloche, Julio; Bezrukov, Sergey M.; Kish, Laszlo B. 2003. Dreams versus Reality: Plenary Debate Session on Quantum Computing. Quantum Information Processing. 2 6: 449472. arXiv:quantph0310130. doi:10.1023B:QINP.0000042203.24782.9a. hdl:2027.4245526.
Ambainis, Andris 2000. The Physical Implementation of Quantum Computation. Fortschritte der Physik. 48 911: 771783. arXiv:quantph0002077. doi:10.10021521397820000948:911771::AIDPROP7713.0.CO;2E.
DiVincenzo, David P. 1995. Quantum Computation. Science. 270 5234: 255261. Bibcode:1995Sci...270..255D. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.242.2165. doi:10.1126science.270.5234.255. Table 1 lists switching and dephasing times for various systems.
Feynman, Richard 1982. Simulating physics with computers. International Journal of Theoretical Physics. 21 67: 467488. Bibcode:1982IJTP...21..467F. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.45.9310. doi:10.1007BF02650179.
Jaeger, Gregg 2006. Quantum Information: An Overview. Berlin: Springer. ISBN 9780387357256. OCLC 255569451.
Singer, Stephanie Frank 2005. Linearity, Symmetry, and Prediction in the Hydrogen Atom. New York: Springer. ISBN 9780387246376. OCLC 253709076.
Benenti, Giuliano 2004. Principles of Quantum Computation and Information Volume 1. New Jersey: World Scientific. ISBN 9789812388308. OCLC 179950736.
Lomonaco, Sam. Four Lectures on Quantum Computing given at Oxford University in July 2006
Ambainis, Andris 1998. Quantum computation with linear optics. arXiv:quantph9806048.
Stolze, Joachim; Suter, Dieter 2004. Quantum Computing. WileyVCH. ISBN 9783527404384.
Mitchell, Ian 1998. Computing Power into the 21st Century: Moores Law and Beyond.
Landauer, Rolf 1961. Irreversibility and heat generation in the computing process PDF.
Moore, Gordon E. 1965. Cramming more components onto integrated circuits. Electronics Magazine.
Keyes, R. W. 1988. Miniaturization of electronics and its limits. IBM Journal of Research and Development.
Nielsen, M. A.; Knill, E.; Laflamme, R. Complete Quantum Teleportation By Nuclear Magnetic Resonance.
Vandersypen, Lieven M.K.; Yannoni, Constantino S.; Chuang, Isaac L. 2000. Liquid state NMR Quantum Computing.
Hiroshi, Imai; Masahito, Hayashi 2006. Quantum Computation and Information. Berlin: Springer. ISBN 9783540331322.
Berthiaume, Andre 1997. Quantum Computation.
Simon, Daniel R. 1994. On the Power of Quantum Computation. Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers Computer Society Press.
Seminar Post Quantum Cryptology. Chair for communication security at the RuhrUniversity Bochum.permanent dead link
Sanders, Laura 2009. First programmable quantum computer created.
New trends in quantum computation.
Wichert, Andreas 2014. Principles of Quantum Artificial Intelligence. World Scientific Publishing Co. ISBN 9789814566742.
Akama, Seiki 2014. Elements of Quantum Computing: History, Theories and Engineering Applications. Springer International Publishing. ISBN 9783319082844.
External links
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Quantum computer.
for video explanation click here
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy: Quantum Computing by Amit Hagar.
Ambainis, Andris 2013. Quantum Annealing and Computation: A Brief Documentary Note. arXiv:1310.1339 physics.histph.
Maryland University Laboratory for Physical Sciences: conducts researches for the quantum computerbased project led by the NSA, named Penetrating Hard Target.
Visualized history of quantum computing
Ambainis, Andris; Chakrabarti, Bikas K. 2008. Quantum Annealing and Analog Quantum Computation. Rev. Mod. Phys. 80 3: 10611081. arXiv:0801.2193. doi:10.1103RevModPhys.80.1061.
Hazewinkel, Michiel, ed. 2001 1994, Quantum computation, theory of, Encyclopedia of Mathematics, Springer ScienceBusiness Media B.V.  Kluwer Academic Publishers, ISBN 9781556080104
Patenting in the field of quantum computing
1
Lectures
for video explanation click here
Quantum computing for the determined  22 video lectures by Michael Nielsen
Video Lectures by David Deutsch
Lectures at the Institut Henri Poincar slides and videos
Online lecture on An Introduction to Quantum Computing, Edward Gerjuoy 2008
Quantum Computing research by Mikko Mttnen at Aalto University video on YouTube
vte
Quantum information science
vte
Emerging technologies
vte
Major fields of computer science
vte
Quantum mechanics
Authority control Edit this at Wikidata
BNE: XX556504 BNF: cb135068781 data GND: 45333725 LCCN: sh98002795 NDL: 01072652
Categories: Quantum information scienceQuantum computingModels of computationQuantum cryptographyInformation theoryComputational complexity theoryClasses of computersTheoretical computer scienceOpen problemsComputerrelated introductions in 1980Emerging technologies

Reinforcement learning
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
For reinforcement learning in psychology, see Reinforcement and Operant conditioning.
Machine learning and
data mining
Kernel Machine.svg
Problemsshow
Supervised learning
classification  regression
show
Clusteringshow
Dimensionality reductionshow
Structured predictionshow
Anomaly detectionshow
Artificial neural networksshow
Reinforcement learningshow
Theoryshow
Machinelearning venuesshow
Glossary of artificial intelligenceshow
Related articlesshow
Portalpuzzle.svg Machine learning portal
vte
Reinforcement learning RL is an area of machine learning concerned with how software agents ought to take actions in an environment so as to maximize some notion of cumulative reward. The problem, due to its generality, is studied in many other disciplines, such as game theory, control theory, operations research, information theory, simulationbased optimization, multiagent systems, swarm intelligence, statistics and genetic algorithms. In the operations research and control literature, reinforcement learning is called approximate dynamic programming, or neurodynamic programming.12 The problems of interest in reinforcement learning have also been studied in the theory of optimal control, which is concerned mostly with the existence and characterization of optimal solutions, and algorithms for their exact computation, and less with learning or approximation, particularly in the absence of a mathematical model of the environment. In economics and game theory, reinforcement learning may be used to explain how equilibrium may arise under bounded rationality. In machine learning, the environment is typically formulated as a Markov Decision Process MDP, as many reinforcement learning algorithms for this context utilize dynamic programming techniques.213 The main difference between the classical dynamic programming methods and reinforcement learning algorithms is that the latter do not assume knowledge of an exact mathematical model of the MDP and they target large MDPs where exact methods become infeasible.21

Reinforcement learning differs from standard supervised learning in that correct inputoutput pairsclarification needed need not be presented, and suboptimal actions need not be explicitly corrected. Instead the focus is on performanceclarification needed, which involves finding a balance between exploration of uncharted territory and exploitation of current knowledge.4 The exploration vs. exploitation tradeoff has been most thoroughly studied through the multiarmed bandit problem and in finite MDPs.citation needed


Contents
1Introduction
2Exploration
3Algorithms for control learning
3.1Criterion of optimality
3.2Brute force
3.3Value function
3.4Direct policy search
4Theory
5Research
6Comparison of reinforcement learning algorithms
6.1Endtoend deep reinforcement learning
6.2Inverse reinforcement learning
6.3Apprenticeship learning
7See also
8Footnotes
9References
10Literature
10.1Conferences, journals
11External links
Introduction

The typical framing of a Reinforcement Learning RL scenario: an agent takes actions in an environment, which is interpreted into a reward and a representation of the state, which are fed back into the agent.
Basic reinforcement is modeled as a Markov decision process:

a set of environment and agent states, S;
a set of actions, A, of the agent;
displaystyle Pas,sPrst1ssts,ata displaystyle Pas,sPrst1ssts,ata is the probability of transition from state displaystyle s s to state displaystyle s s under action displaystyle a a.
displaystyle Ras,s Ras,s is the immediate reward after transition from displaystyle s s to displaystyle s s with action displaystyle a a.
rules that describe what the agent observes
Rules are often stochastic. The observation typically involves the scalar, immediate reward associated with the last transition. In many works, the agent is assumed to observe the current environmental state full observability. If not, the agent has partial observability. Sometimes the set of actions available to the agent is restricted a zero balance cannot be reduced.

A reinforcement learning agent interacts with its environment in discrete time steps. At each time t, the agent receives an observation displaystyle ot ot, which typically includes the reward displaystyle rt rt. It then chooses an action displaystyle at at from the set of available actions, which is subsequently sent to the environment. The environment moves to a new state displaystyle st1 st1 and the reward displaystyle rt1 rt1 associated with the transition displaystyle st,at,st1 st,at,st1 is determined. The goal of a reinforcement learning agent is to collect as much reward as possible. The agent can possibly randomly choose any action as a function of the history.

When the agents performance is compared to that of an agent that acts optimally, the difference in performance gives rise to the notion of regret. In order to act near optimally, the agent must reason about the long term consequences of its actions i.e., maximize future income, although the immediate reward associated with this might be negative.

Thus, reinforcement learning is particularly wellsuited to problems that include a longterm versus shortterm reward tradeoff. It has been applied successfully to various problems, including robot control, elevator scheduling, telecommunications, backgammon, checkers5 and go AlphaGo.

Two elements make reinforcement learning powerful: the use of samples to optimize performance and the use of function approximation to deal with large environments. Thanks to these two key components, reinforcement learning can be used in large environments in the following situations:

A model of the environment is known, but an analytic solution is not available;
Only a simulation model of the environment is given the subject of simulationbased optimization;6
The only way to collect information about the environment is to interact with it.
The first two of these problems could be considered planning problems since some form of model is available, while the last one could be considered to be a genuine learning problem. However, reinforcement learning converts both planning problems to machine learning problems.

Exploration
Reinforcement learning requires clever exploration mechanisms. Randomly selecting actions, without reference to an estimated probability distribution, shows poor performance. The case of small finite Markov decision processes is relatively well understood. However, due to the lack of algorithms that provably scale well with the number of states or scale to problems with infinite state spaces, simple exploration methods are the most practical.

One such method is displaystyle epsilon  epsilon greedy, when the agent chooses the action that it believes has the best longterm effect with probability displaystyle 1epsilon  1epsilon . If no action which satisfies this condition is found, the agent chooses an action uniformly at random. Here, displaystyle 0epsilon 1 displaystyle 0epsilon 1 is a tuning parameter, which is sometimes changed, either according to a fixed schedule making the agent explore progressively less, or adaptively based on heuristics.7

Algorithms for control learning
Even if the issue of exploration is disregarded and even if the state was observable assumed hereafter, the problem remains to use past experience to find out which actions are good.

Criterion of optimality
Policy
The agents action selection is modeled as a map called policy:

displaystyle pi :Stimes Arightarrow 0,1 displaystyle pi :Stimes Arightarrow 0,1
displaystyle pi asPatasts displaystyle pi asPatasts
The policy map gives the probability of taking action displaystyle a a when in state displaystyle s s.8:61 There are also nonprobabilistic policies.

Statevalue function
Value function displaystyle Vpi s displaystyle Vpi s is defined as the expected return starting with state displaystyle s s, i.e. displaystyle s0s displaystyle s0s, and successively following policy displaystyle pi  pi . Hence, roughly speaking, the value function estimates how good it is to be in a given state.8:60

displaystyle Vpi sERtextstyle Esum t0infty gamma trts0s, displaystyle Vpi sERtextstyle Esum t0infty gamma trts0s,
where the random variable displaystyle R R denotes the return, and is defined as the sum of future discounted rewards

textstyle Rsum t0infty gamma trt, textstyle Rsum t0infty gamma trt,
where displaystyle rt rt is the reward at step displaystyle t t, displaystyle gamma in 0,1 displaystyle gamma in 0,1 is the discountrate.

The algorithm must find a policy with maximum expected return. From the theory of MDPs it is known that, without loss of generality, the search can be restricted to the set of socalled stationary policies. A policy is stationary if the actiondistribution returned by it depends only on the last state visited from the observation agents history. The search can be further restricted to deterministic stationary policies. A deterministic stationary policy deterministically selects actions based on the current state. Since any such policy can be identified with a mapping from the set of states to the set of actions, these policies can be identified with such mappings with no loss of generality.

Brute force
The brute force approach entails two steps:

For each possible policy, sample returns while following it
Choose the policy with the largest expected return
One problem with this is that the number of policies can be large, or even infinite. Another is that variance of the returns may be large, which requires many samples to accurately estimate the return of each policy.

These problems can be ameliorated if we assume some structure and allow samples generated from one policy to influence the estimates made for others. The two main approaches for achieving this are value function estimation and direct policy search.

Value function
Value function approaches attempt to find a policy that maximizes the return by maintaining a set of estimates of expected returns for some policy usually either the current onpolicy or the optimal offpolicy one.

These methods rely on the theory of MDPs, where optimality is defined in a sense that is stronger than the above one: A policy is called optimal if it achieves the best expected return from any initial state i.e., initial distributions play no role in this definition. Again, an optimal policy can always be found amongst stationary policies.

To define optimality in a formal manner, define the value of a policy displaystyle pi  pi  by

displaystyle Vpi sERs,pi , Vpi sERs,pi ,
where displaystyle R R stands for the return associated with following displaystyle pi  pi  from the initial state displaystyle s s. Defining displaystyle Vs Vs as the maximum possible value of displaystyle Vpi s Vpi s, where displaystyle pi  pi  is allowed to change,

displaystyle Vsmax limits pi Vpi s. displaystyle Vsmax limits pi Vpi s.
A policy that achieves these optimal values in each state is called optimal. Clearly, a policy that is optimal in this strong sense is also optimal in the sense that it maximizes the expected return displaystyle rho pi  rho pi , since displaystyle rho pi EVpi S rho pi EVpi S, where displaystyle S S is a state randomly sampled from the distribution displaystyle mu  mu clarification needed.

Although statevalues suffice to define optimality, it is useful to define actionvalues. Given a state displaystyle s s, an action displaystyle a a and a policy displaystyle pi  pi , the actionvalue of the pair displaystyle s,a s,a under displaystyle pi  pi  is defined by

displaystyle Qpi s,aERs,a,pi ,, Qpi s,aERs,a,pi ,,
where displaystyle R R now stands for the random return associated with first taking action displaystyle a a in state displaystyle s s and following displaystyle pi  pi , thereafter.

The theory of MDPs states that if displaystyle pi  pi is an optimal policy, we act optimally take the optimal action by choosing the action from displaystyle Qpi s,cdot  displaystyle Qpi s,cdot  with the highest value at each state, displaystyle s s. The actionvalue function of such an optimal policy  displaystyle Qpi  displaystyle Qpi  is called the optimal actionvalue function and is commonly denoted by displaystyle Q Q. In summary, the knowledge of the optimal actionvalue function alone suffices to know how to act optimally.

Assuming full knowledge of the MDP, the two basic approaches to compute the optimal actionvalue function are value iteration and policy iteration. Both algorithms compute a sequence of functions displaystyle Qk Qk  displaystyle k0,1,2,ldots  k0,1,2,ldots  that converge to displaystyle Q Q. Computing these functions involves computing expectations over the whole statespace, which is impractical for all but the smallest finite MDPs. In reinforcement learning methods, expectations are approximated by averaging over samples and using function approximation techniques to cope with the need to represent value functions over large stateaction spaces.

Monte Carlo methods
Monte Carlo methods can be used in an algorithm that mimics policy iteration. Policy iteration consists of two steps: policy evaluation and policy improvement.

Monte Carlo is used in the policy evaluation step. In this step, given a stationary, deterministic policy displaystyle pi  pi , the goal is to compute the function values displaystyle Qpi s,a Qpi s,a or a good approximation to them for all stateaction pairs displaystyle s,a s,a. Assuming for simplicity that the MDP is finite, that sufficient memory is available to accommodate the actionvalues and that the problem is episodic and after each episode a new one starts from some random initial state. Then, the estimate of the value of a given stateaction pair displaystyle s,a s,a can be computed by averaging the sampled returns that originated from displaystyle s,a s,a over time. Given sufficient time, this procedure can thus construct a precise estimate displaystyle Q Q of the actionvalue function displaystyle Qpi  Qpi . This finishes the description of the policy evaluation step.

In the policy improvement step, the next policy is obtained by computing a greedy policy with respect to displaystyle Q Q: Given a state displaystyle s s, this new policy returns an action that maximizes displaystyle Qs,cdot  Qs,cdot . In practice lazy evaluation can defer the computation of the maximizing actions to when they are needed.

Problems with this procedure include:

The procedure may spend too much time evaluating a suboptimal policy.
It uses samples inefficiently in that a long trajectory improves the estimate only of the single stateaction pair that started the trajectory.
When the returns along the trajectories have high variance, convergence is slow.
It works in episodic problems only;
It works in small, finite MDPs only.
Temporal difference methods
Main article: Temporal difference learning
The first problem is corrected by allowing the procedure to change the policy at some or all states before the values settle. This too may be problematic as it might prevent convergence. Most current algorithms do this, giving rise to the class of generalized policy iteration algorithms. Many actor critic methods belong to this category.

The second issue can be corrected by allowing trajectories to contribute to any stateaction pair in them. This may also help to some extent with the third problem, although a better solution when returns have high variance is Suttons910 temporal difference TD methods that are based on the recursive Bellman equation. Note that the computation in TD methods can be incremental when after each transition the memory is changed and the transition is thrown away, or batch when the transitions are batched and the estimates are computed once based on the batch. Batch methods, such as the leastsquares temporal difference method,11 may use the information in the samples better, while incremental methods are the only choice when batch methods are infeasible due to their high computational or memory complexity. Some methods try to combine the two approaches. Methods based on temporal differences also overcome the fourth issue.

In order to address the fifth issue, function approximation methods are used. Linear function approximation starts with a mapping displaystyle phi  phi  that assigns a finitedimensional vector to each stateaction pair. Then, the action values of a stateaction pair displaystyle s,a s,a are obtained by linearly combining the components of displaystyle phi s,a phi s,a with some weights displaystyle theta  theta :

displaystyle Qs,asum limits i1dtheta iphi is,a Qs,asum limits i1dtheta iphi is,a.
The algorithms then adjust the weights, instead of adjusting the values associated with the individual stateaction pairs. Methods based on ideas from nonparametric statistics which can be seen to construct their own features have been explored.

Value iteration can also be used as a starting point, giving rise to the QLearning algorithm and its many variants. 12

The problem with using actionvalues is that they may need highly precise estimates of the competing action values that can be hard to obtain when the returns are noisy. Though this problem is mitigated to some extent by temporal difference methods. Using the socalled compatible function approximation method compromises generality and efficiency. Another problem specific to TD comes from their reliance on the recursive Bellman equation. Most TD methods have a socalled displaystyle lambda  lambda  parameter displaystyle 0leq lambda leq 1 0leq lambda leq 1 that can continuously interpolate between Monte Carlo methods that do not rely on the Bellman equations and the basic TD methods that rely entirely on the Bellman equations. This can be effective in palliating this issue.

Direct policy search
An alternative method is to search directly in some subset of the policy space, in which case the problem becomes a case of stochastic optimization. The two approaches available are gradientbased and gradientfree methods.

Gradientbased methods policy gradient methods start with a mapping from a finitedimensional parameter space to the space of policies: given the parameter vector displaystyle theta  theta , let displaystyle pi theta  pi theta  denote the policy associated to displaystyle theta  theta . Defining the performance function by

displaystyle rho theta rho pi theta . rho theta rho pi theta .,
under mild conditions this function will be differentiable as a function of the parameter vector displaystyle theta  theta . If the gradient of displaystyle rho  rho  was known, one could use gradient ascent. Since an analytic expression for the gradient is not available, only a noisy estimate is available. Such an estimate can be constructed in many ways, giving rise to algorithms such as Williams REINFORCE13 method which is known as the likelihood ratio method in the simulationbased optimization literature.14 Policy search methods have been used in the robotics context.15 Many policy search methods may get stuck in local optima as they are based on local search.

A large class of methods avoids relying on gradient information.These include simulated annealing, crossentropy search or methods of evolutionary computation. Many gradientfree methods can achieve in theory and in the limit a global optimum.

Policy search methods may converge slowly given noisy data. For example, this happens in episodic problems when the trajectories are long and the variance of the returns is large. Valuefunction based methods that rely on temporal differences might help in this case. In recent years, actorcritic methods have been proposed and performed well on various problems.16

Theory
Both the asymptotic and finitesample behavior of most algorithms is well understood. Algorithms with provably good online performance addressing the exploration issue are known.

Efficient exploration of large MDPs is largely unexplored except for the case of bandit problems.clarification needed Although finitetime performance bounds appeared for many algorithms, these bounds are expected to be rather loose and thus more work is needed to better understand the relative advantages and limitations.

For incremental algorithms, asymptotic convergence issues have been settled. Temporaldifferencebased algorithms converge under a wider set of conditions than was previously possible for example, when used with arbitrary, smooth function approximation.

Research
Research topics include

adaptive methods that work with fewer or no parameters under a large number of condition
addressing the exploration problem in large MDPs
largescale empirical evaluations
learning and acting under partial information e.g., using Predictive State Representation
modular and hierarchical reinforcement learning
improving existing valuefunction and policy search methods
algorithms that work well with large or continuous action spaces
transfer learning
lifelong learning
efficient samplebased planning e.g., based on Monte Carlo tree search.
Multiagent or distributed reinforcement learning is a topic of interest. Applications are expanding.17

ActorCritic Reinforcement Learning
Reinforcement learning algorithms such as TD learning are under investigation as a model for dopaminebased learning in the brain. In this model, the dopaminergic projections from the substantia nigra to the basal ganglia function as the prediction error. Reinforcement learning has been used as a part of the model for human skill learning, especially in relation to the interaction between implicit and explicit learning in skill acquisition the first publication on this application was in 19951996.18

Comparison of reinforcement learning algorithms
AlgorithmDescriptionModelPolicyAction SpaceState SpaceOperator
Monte CarloEvery visit to Monte CarloModelFreeOffpolicyDiscreteDiscreteSamplemeans
QlearningStateactionrewardstateModelFreeOffpolicyDiscreteDiscreteQvalue
SARSAStateactionrewardstateactionModelFreeOnpolicyDiscreteDiscreteQvalue
Qlearning  LambdaStateactionrewardstate with eligibility tracesModelFreeOffpolicyDiscreteDiscreteQvalue
SARSA  LambdaStateactionrewardstateaction with eligibility tracesModelFreeOnpolicyDiscreteDiscreteQvalue
DQNDeep Q NetworkModelFreeOffpolicyDiscreteContinuousQvalue
DDPGDeep Deterministic Policy GradientModelFreeOffpolicyContinuousContinuousQvalue
A3CAsynchronous ActorCritic AlgorithmModelFreeOffpolicyContinuousContinuousQvalue
NAFQLearning with Normalized Advantage FunctionsModelFreeOffpolicyContinuousContinuousAdvantage
TRPOTrust Region Policy OptimizationModelFreeOnpolicyContinuousContinuousAdvantage
PPOProximal Policy OptimizationModelFreeOnpolicyContinuousContinuousAdvantage
Endtoend deep reinforcement learning
The work on learning ATARI TV games by Google DeepMind19 increased attention to endtoend reinforcement learning or deep reinforcement learning. This approach extends reinforcement learning to the entire process from observation to action sensors to motors or end to end by forming it using a deep network and without explicitly designing state space or action space.

Inverse reinforcement learning
In inverse reinforcement learning IRL, no reward function is given. Instead, the reward function is inferred given an observed behavior from an expert. The idea is to mimic observed behavior, which is often optimal or close to optimal.20

Apprenticeship learning
In apprenticeship learning, an expert demonstrates the target behavior. The system tries to recover the policy via observation.

See also
Temporal difference learning
Qlearning
Stateactionrewardstateaction SARSA
Fictitious play
Learning classifier system
Optimal control
Dynamic treatment regimes
Errordriven learning
Multiagent system
Distributed artificial intelligence
Footnotes
 Dimitri P. Bertsekas. Dynamic Programming and Optimal Control: Approximate Dynamic Programming, Vol.II, Athena Scientific, 2012,1
 Dimitri P. Bertsekas and John N. Tsitsiklis. NeuroDynamic Programming, Athena Scientific, 1996,2
 van Otterlo, M.; Wiering, M. 2012. Reinforcement learning and markov decision processes. Reinforcement Learning. Springer Berlin Heidelberg: 342.
 Kaelbling, Leslie P.; Littman, Michael L.; Moore, Andrew W. 1996. Reinforcement Learning: A Survey. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research. 4: 237285. Archived from the original on 20011120.
 Sutton  Barto, Chapter 11.
 Gosavi 2003.
 Tokic, Michel; Palm, Gnther 2011, ValueDifference Based Exploration: Adaptive Control Between EpsilonGreedy and Softmax, KI 2011: Advances in Artificial Intelligence PDF, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 7006, Springer, pp. 335346, ISBN 9783642244551
 Reinforcement learning: An introduction PDF.
 Sutton 1984.
 Sutton  Barto 1998, 6. TemporalDifference Learning.
 Bradke  Barto 1996.
 Watkins 1989.
 Williams 1987.
 Peters, Vijayakumar  Schall 2003.
 Deisenroth, Neumann  Peters 2013.
 Juliani, Arthur 20161217. Simple Reinforcement Learning with Tensorflow Part 8: Asynchronous ActorCritic Agents A3C. Medium. Retrieved 20180222.
 Reinforcement Learning  Successes of Reinforcement Learning. umichrl.pbworks.com. Retrieved 20170806.
 3 Archived 20170426 at the Wayback Machine.
 Mnih, Volodymyr; et al. 2015. Humanlevel control through deep reinforcement learning. Nature. 518 7540: 529533. Bibcode:2015Natur.518..529M. doi:10.1038nature14236.
 Ng, A. Y.,  Russell, S. J. 2000, June. Algorithms for inverse reinforcement learning. In Icml pp. 663670.
References
Auer, Peter; Jaksch, Thomas; Ortner, Ronald 2010. Nearoptimal regret bounds for reinforcement learning. Journal of Machine Learning Research. 11: 15631600.
Bertsekas, Dimitri P.; Tsitsiklis, John 1996. NeuroDynamic Programming. Nashua, NH: Athena Scientific. ISBN 1886529108.
Bertsekas, Dimitri P. 2012. Dynamic Programming and Optimal Control: Approximate Dynamic Programming, Vol.II. Nashua, NH: Athena Scientific. ISBN 9781886529441.
Busoniu, Lucian; Babuska, Robert; De Schutter, Bart; Ernst, Damien 2010. Reinforcement Learning and Dynamic Programming using Function Approximators. Taylor  Francis CRC Press. ISBN 9781439821084.
Deisenroth, Marc Peter; Neumann, Gerhard; Peters, Jan 2013. A Survey on Policy Search for Robotics. Foundations and Trends in Robotics. 2. NOW Publishers. pp. 1142.Bradtke, Steven J.; Barto, Andrew G. 1996. Learning to predict by the method of temporal differences. Machine Learning. Springer. 22: 3357. doi:10.1023A:1018056104778.
Gosavi, Abhijit 2003. Simulationbased Optimization: Parametric Optimization Techniques and Reinforcement. Springer. ISBN 1402074549.
Peters, Jan; Vijayakumar, Sethu; Schaal, Stefan 2003. Reinforcement Learning for Humanoid Robotics PDF. IEEERAS International Conference on Humanoid Robots.
Powell, Warren 2007. Approximate dynamic programming: solving the curses of dimensionality. WileyInterscience. ISBN 0470171553.
Sutton, Richard S.; Barto, Andrew G. 1998. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. MIT Press. ISBN 0262193981.
Sutton, Richard S. 1988. Learning to predict by the method of temporal differences. Machine Learning. Springer. 3: 944. doi:10.1007BF00115009.
Sutton, Richard S. 1984. Temporal Credit Assignment in Reinforcement Learning PhD thesis. University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA.
Szita, Istvan; Szepesvari, Csaba 2010. Modelbased Reinforcement Learning with Nearly Tight Exploration Complexity Bounds PDF. ICML 2010. Omnipress. pp. 10311038. Archived from the original PDF on 20100714.
Williams, Ronald J. 1987. A class of gradientestimating algorithms for reinforcement learning in neural networks. Proceedings of the IEEE First International Conference on Neural Networks.
Watkins, Christopher J.C.H. 1989. Learning from Delayed Rewards PDF PhD thesis. Kings College, Cambridge, UK.
Literature
Conferences, journals
Most reinforcement learning papers are published at the major machine learning and AI conferences ICML, NIPS, AAAI, IJCAI, UAI, AI and Statistics and journals JAIR, JMLR, Machine learning journal, IEEE TCIAIG. Some theory papers are published at COLT and ALT. However, many papers appear in robotics conferences IROS, ICRA and the agent conference AAMAS. Operations researchers publish their papers at the INFORMS conference and, for example, in the Operation Research, and the Mathematics of Operations Research journals. Control researchers publish their papers at the CDC and ACC conferences, or, e.g., in the journals IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, or Automatica, although applied works tend to be published in more specialized journals. The Winter Simulation Conference also publishes many relevant papers. Other than this, papers also published in the major conferences of the neural networks, fuzzy, and evolutionary computation communities. The annual IEEE symposium titled Approximate Dynamic Programming and Reinforcement Learning ADPRL and the biannual European Workshop on Reinforcement Learning EWRL are two regularly held meetings where RL researchers meet.

External links
Website for Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction 1998, by Rich Sutton and Andrew Barto, MIT Press, including a link to an html version of the book.
Reinforcement Learning Repository
Reinforcement Learning and Artificial Intelligence RLAI, Rich Suttons lab at the University of Alberta
A Beginners Guide to Deep Reinforcement Learning
Autonomous Learning Laboratory ALL, Andrew Bartos lab at the University of Massachusetts Amherst
Hybrid reinforcement learning
Realworld reinforcement learning experiments at Delft University of Technology
Stanford University Andrew Ng Lecture on Reinforcement Learning
Dissecting Reinforcement Learning Series of blog post on RL with Python code
vte
Major fields of computer science
Note: This template roughly follows the 2012 ACM Computing Classification System.
Hardware
Printed circuit board Peripheral Integrated circuit Very Large Scale Integration Systems on Chip SoCs Energy consumption Green computing Electronic design automation Hardware acceleration
Computer systems
organization
Computer architecture Embedded system Realtime computing Dependability
Networks
Network architecture Network protocol Network components Network scheduler Network performance evaluation Network service
Software organization
Interpreter Middleware Virtual machine Operating system Software quality
Software notations
and tools
Programming paradigm Programming language Compiler Domainspecific language Modeling language Software framework Integrated development environment Software configuration management Software library Software repository
Software development
Software development process Requirements analysis Software design Software construction Software deployment Software maintenance Programming team Opensource model
Theory of computation
Model of computation Formal language Automata theory Computational complexity theory Logic Semantics
Algorithms
Algorithm design Analysis of algorithms Algorithmic efficiency Randomized algorithm Computational geometry
Mathematics
of computing
Discrete mathematics Probability Statistics Mathematical software Information theory Mathematical analysis Numerical analysis
Information
systems
Database management system Information storage systems Enterprise information system Social information systems Geographic information system Decision support system Process control system Multimedia information system Data mining Digital library Computing platform Digital marketing World Wide Web Information retrieval
Security
Cryptography Formal methods Security services Intrusion detection system Hardware security Network security Information security Application security
Humancomputer
interaction
Interaction design Social computing Ubiquitous computing Visualization Accessibility
Concurrency
Concurrent computing Parallel computing Distributed computing Multithreading Multiprocessing
Artificial
intelligence
Natural language processing Knowledge representation and reasoning Computer vision Automated planning and scheduling Search methodology Control method Philosophy of artificial intelligence Distributed artificial intelligence
Machine learning
Supervised learning Unsupervised learning Reinforcement learning Multitask learning Crossvalidation
Graphics
Animation Rendering Image manipulation Graphics processing unit Mixed reality Virtual reality Image compression Solid modeling
Applied
computing
Ecommerce Enterprise software Computational mathematics Computational physics Computational chemistry Computational biology Computational social science Computational engineering Computational healthcare Digital art Electronic publishing Cyberwarfare Electronic voting Video games Word processing Operations research Educational technology Document management
Wikipedia book Book Category Category Portal Portal WikiProjectWikiProject Commons page Commons
Categories: Markov modelsMachine learning algorithmsBelief revision

Final Fantasy
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
This article is about the video game franchise. For the first game in the series, see Final Fantasy video game. For other uses, see Final Fantasy disambiguation.
Final Fantasy
Final Fantasy wordmark.svg
GenresRoleplaying video game
DevelopersSquare, Square Enix
PublishersSquare, Square Enix
CreatorsHironobu Sakaguchi
PlatformsArcade, MSX, Android, BlackBerry OS, iOS, Mobile phone, Windows Phone, NES, SNES, GC, GBA, Wii, DS, 3DS, Switch, Ouya, PS1, PS2, PS3, PS4, PSP, PS Vita, Microsoft Windows, Xbox 360, Xbox One, WonderSwan
Platforms of originNintendo Entertainment System
First releaseFinal Fantasy
December 18, 1987
Latest releaseDissidia Final Fantasy NT
January 11, 2018
Spinoffs
Kingdom Hearts series
Mana series
SaGa series
Final Fantasya is a science fantasy media franchise created by Hironobu Sakaguchi, and developed and owned by Square Enix formerly Square. The franchise centers on a series of fantasy and science fantasy roleplaying video games RPGs. The first game in the series was published in 1987; it was a success and spawned sequels. The series has since branched into other genres such as tactical roleplaying, action roleplaying, massively multiplayer online roleplaying, racing, thirdperson shooter, fighting, and rhythm. The franchise has also branched out into other media, including CGI films, anime, manga, and novels.

Final Fantasy installments are generally standalone stories each with different settings, plots and main characters, however, as a corpus they feature identical elements that define the franchise. Recurring elements include plot thematics, character names, and game mechanics. Plots center on a group of heroes battling a great evil while exploring the characters internal struggles and relationships. Character names are frequently derived from the history, languages, pop culture, and mythologies of cultures worldwide.

The series has been both commercially and critically successful, with more than 142 million units sold worldwide, making it one of the bestselling video game franchises of all time. The series is well known for its innovation, visuals, and music, such as the inclusion of full motion videos, photorealistic character models, and music by Nobuo Uematsu. Final Fantasy has been a driving force in the video game industry, and the series has affected Square Enixs business practices and its relationships with other video game developers. It has popularized many features now common in roleplaying games, also popularizing the genre as a whole in markets outside Japan.


Contents
1Media
1.1Games
1.1.1Main series
1.1.2Remakes, sequels and spinoffs
1.2Related media
1.2.1Film and television
1.2.2Other media
2Common elements
2.1Plot and themes
2.2Characters
2.3Gameplay
3Development and history
3.1Origin
3.2Design
3.3Graphics and technology
3.4Music
4Reception
4.1Critical response
4.2Rankings and aggregators
5Impact and legacy
6See also
7Notes
8References
9External links
Media
Further information: List of Final Fantasy media
Games
Main article: List of Final Fantasy video games
The first installment of the series was released in Japan on December 18, 1987. Subsequent games are numbered and given a story unrelated to previous games, so the numbers refer to volumes rather than to sequels. Many Final Fantasy games have been localized for markets in North America, Europe, and Australia on numerous video game consoles, personal computers PC, and mobile phones. Future installments will appear on seventh and eighth generation consoles. As of November 2016, the series includes the main installments from Final Fantasy to Final Fantasy XV, as well as direct sequels and spinoffs, both released and confirmed as being in development. Most of the older games have been remade or rereleased on multiple platforms.1

Main series
Timeline of release years
1987Final Fantasy
1988Final Fantasy II
1989
1990Final Fantasy III
1991Final Fantasy IV
1992Final Fantasy V
1993
1994Final Fantasy VI
1995
1996
1997Final Fantasy VII
1998
1999Final Fantasy VIII
2000Final Fantasy IX
2001Final Fantasy X
2002Final Fantasy XI
2003
2004
2005
2006Final Fantasy XII
2007
2008
2009Final Fantasy XIII
2010Final Fantasy XIV
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016Final Fantasy XV
Three Final Fantasy installments were released on the Nintendo Entertainment System NES. Final Fantasy was released in Japan in 1987 and in North America in 1990.23 It introduced many concepts to the console RPG genre, and has since been remade on several platforms.3 Final Fantasy II, released in 1988 in Japan, has been bundled with Final Fantasy in several rereleases.345 The last of the NES installments, Final Fantasy III, was released in Japan in 1990;6 however, it was not released elsewhere until a Nintendo DS remake in 2006.5

The Super Nintendo Entertainment System SNES also featured three installments of the main series, all of which have been rereleased on several platforms. Final Fantasy IV was released in 1991; in North America, it was released as Final Fantasy II.78 It introduced the Active Time Battle system.9 Final Fantasy V, released in 1992 in Japan, was the first game in the series to spawn a sequel: a short anime series, Final Fantasy: Legend of the Crystals.31011 Final Fantasy VI was released in Japan in 1994, titled Final Fantasy III in North America.12

The PlayStation console saw the release of three main Final Fantasy games. Final Fantasy VII 1997 moved away from the twodimensional 2D graphics used in the first six games to threedimensional 3D computer graphics; the game features polygonal characters on prerendered backgrounds. It also introduced a more modern setting, a style that was carried over to the next game.3 It was also the second in the series to be released in Europe, with the first being Final Fantasy Mystic Quest. Final Fantasy VIII was published in 1999, and was the first to consistently use realistically proportioned characters and feature a vocal piece as its theme music.313 Final Fantasy IX, released in 2000, returned to the series roots by revisiting a more traditional Final Fantasy setting rather than the more modern worlds of VII and VIII.314

Three main installments, as well as one online game, were published for the PlayStation 2 PS2.151617 Final Fantasy X 2001 introduced full 3D areas and voice acting to the series, and was the first to spawn a direct video game sequel Final Fantasy X2, published in 2003.1819 The first massively multiplayer online roleplaying game MMORPG in the series, Final Fantasy XI, was released on the PS2 and PC in 2002, and later on the Xbox 360.2021 It introduced realtime battles instead of random encounters.21 Final Fantasy XII, published in 2006, also includes realtime battles in large, interconnected playfields.2223 The game is also the first in the main series to utilize a world used in a previous game, namely the land of Ivalice, which had previously featured in Final Fantasy Tactics and Vagrant Story.24

In 2009, Final Fantasy XIII was released in Japan, and in North America and Europe the following year, for PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360.2526 It is the flagship installment of the Fabula Nova Crystallis Final Fantasy series27 and became the first mainline game to spawn two direct sequels XIII2 and Lightning Returns.28 It was also the first game released in Chinese  High Definition along with being released on two consoles at once. Final Fantasy XIV, a MMORPG, was released worldwide on Microsoft Windows in 2010, but it received heavy criticism when it was launched, prompting Square Enix to rerelease the game as Final Fantasy XIV: A Realm Reborn, this time to the PlayStation 3 as well, in 2013.29 Final Fantasy XV is an action roleplaying game that was released for PlayStation 4 and Xbox One in 2016.3031 Originally a XIII spinoff titled Versus XIII, XV uses the mythos of the Fabula Nova Crystallis series, although in many other respects the game stands on its own and has since been distanced from the series by its developers.323334353637

Remakes, sequels and spinoffs
See also: List of Final Fantasy video games, List of Square Enix mobile games, and Category: Final Fantasy spinoffs
Final Fantasy has spawned numerous spinoffs and metaseries. Several are, in fact, not Final Fantasy games, but were rebranded for North American release. Examples include the SaGa series, rebranded The Final Fantasy Legend, and its two sequels, Final Fantasy Legend II and Final Fantasy Legend III.38 Final Fantasy Mystic Quest was specifically developed for a United States audience, and Final Fantasy Tactics is a tactical RPG that features many references and themes found in the series.3940 The spinoff Chocobo series, Crystal Chronicles series, and Kingdom Hearts series also include multiple Final Fantasy elements.3841 In 2003, the Final Fantasy series first direct sequel, Final Fantasy X2, was released.42 Final Fantasy XIII was originally intended to stand on its own, but the team wanted to explore the world, characters and mythos more, resulting in the development and release of two sequels in 2011 and 2013 respectively, creating the series first official trilogy.28 Dissidia Final Fantasy was released in 2009, a fighting game that features heroes and villains from the first ten games of the main series.43 It was followed by a prequel in 2011.44 Other spinoffs have taken the form of subseriesCompilation of Final Fantasy VII, Ivalice Alliance, and Fabula Nova Crystallis Final Fantasy.

Related media
Film and television
Final Fantasy in film
1994Final Fantasy: Legend of the Crystals
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001Final Fantasy: The Spirits Within
2002
2003
2004
2005Final Fantasy VII: Advent Children
Last Order: Final Fantasy VII
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016Kingsglaive: Final Fantasy XV
Brotherhood: Final Fantasy XV
Square Enix has expanded the Final Fantasy series into various media. Multiple anime and computergenerated imagery CGI films have been produced that are based either on individual Final Fantasy games or on the series as a whole. The first was an original video animation OVA, Final Fantasy: Legend of the Crystals, a sequel to Final Fantasy V. The story was set in the same world as the game, although 200 years in the future. It was released as four 30minute episodes, first in Japan in 1994 and later in the United States by Urban Vision in 1998. In 2001, Square Pictures released its first feature film, Final Fantasy: The Spirits Within. The film is set on a future Earth invaded by alien life forms.45 The Spirits Within was the first animated feature to seriously attempt to portray photorealistic CGI humans, but was considered a box office bomb and garnered mixed reviews.454647

In 2005, Final Fantasy VII: Advent Children, a theatrical CGI film, and Last Order: Final Fantasy VII, a noncanon OVA,48 were released as part of the Compilation of Final Fantasy VII. Advent Children was animated by Visual Works, which helped the company create CG sequences for the games.49 The film, unlike The Spirits Within, gained mixed to positive reviews from critics505152 and has become a commercial success.53 Last Order, on the other hand, was released in Japan in a special DVD bundle package with Advent Children. Last Order sold out quickly54 and was positively received by Western critics,5556 though fan reaction was mixed over changes to established story scenes.57

A 25episode anime television series, Final Fantasy: Unlimited, was released in 2001 based on the common elements of the Final Fantasy series. It was broadcast in Japan by TV Tokyo and released in North America by ADV Films.

Two animated tieins for Final Fantasy XV were announced at the Uncovered Final Fantasy XV fan and press event, forming part of a larger multimedia project dubbed the Final Fantasy XV Universe. Brotherhood: Final Fantasy XV is a series of five 10to20minutelong episodes developed by A1 Pictures and Square Enix detailing the backstories of the main cast. Kingsglaive: Final Fantasy XV, a CGI movie set for release prior to the game in Summer 2016, is set during the games opening and follows new and secondary characters.58596061

Other media
Several video games have either been adapted into or have had spinoffs in the form of manga and novels. The first was the novelization of Final Fantasy II in 1989, and was followed by a manga adaptation of Final Fantasy III in 1992.6263 The past decade has seen an increase in the number of nonvideo game adaptations and spinoffs. Final Fantasy: The Spirits Within has been adapted into a novel, the spinoff game Final Fantasy Crystal Chronicles has been adapted into a manga, and Final Fantasy XI has had a novel and manga set in its continuity.64656667 Seven novellas based on the Final Fantasy VII universe have also been released. The Final Fantasy: Unlimited story was partially continued in novels and a manga after the anime series ended.68 The Final Fantasy X and Final Fantasy XIII series have also had novellas and audio dramas released. Two games, Final Fantasy Tactics Advance and Final Fantasy: Unlimited, have been adapted into radio dramas.

A trading card game named the Final Fantasy trading card game is produced by Square Enix and Hobby Japan, first released Japan in 2012 with an English version in 2016.69 The game has been compared to Magic: the Gathering, and a tournament circuit for the game also takes place.7071

Common elements
Although most Final Fantasy installments are independent, many gameplay elements recur throughout the series.7273 Most games contain elements of fantasy and science fiction and feature recycled names often inspired from various cultures history, languages and mythology, including Asian, European, and MiddleEastern.74 Examples include weapon names like Excalibur and Masamunederived from Arthurian legend and the Japanese swordsmith Masamune respectivelyas well as the spell names Holy, Meteor, and Ultima.7374 Beginning with Final Fantasy IV, the main series adopted its current logo style that features the same typeface and an emblem designed by Japanese artist Yoshitaka Amano. The emblem relates to a games plot and typically portrays a character or object in the story. Subsequent remakes of the first three games have replaced the previous logos with ones similar to the rest of the series.73

Plot and themes

Final Fantasy V is typical of the earlier games in the series, in that the heroes must attempt to retrieve crystals to save the world from an ancient evil.
The central conflict in many Final Fantasy games focuses on a group of characters battling an evil, and sometimes ancient, antagonist that dominates the games world. Stories frequently involve a sovereign state in rebellion, with the protagonists taking part in the rebellion. The heroes are often destined to defeat the evil, and occasionally gather as a direct result of the antagonists malicious actions.374 Another staple of the series is the existence of two villains; the main villain is not always who it appears to be, as the primary antagonist may actually be subservient to another character or entity.3 The main antagonist introduced at the beginning of the game is not always the final enemy, and the characters must continue their quest beyond what appears to be the final fight.74

Stories in the series frequently emphasize the internal struggles, passions, and tragedies of the characters, and the main plot often recedes into the background as the focus shifts to their personal lives.2375 Games also explore relationships between characters, ranging from love to rivalry.3 Other recurring situations that drive the plot include amnesia, a hero corrupted by an evil force, mistaken identity, and selfsacrifice.37677 Magical orbs and crystals are recurring ingame items that are frequently connected to the themes of the games plots.74 Crystals often play a central role in the creation of the world, and a majority of the Final Fantasy games link crystals and orbs to the planets life force. As such, control over these crystals drives the main conflict.7478 The classical elements are also a recurring theme in the series related to the heroes, villains, and items.74 Other common plot and setting themes include the Gaia hypothesis, an apocalypse, and conflicts between advanced technology and nature.747679

Characters
Further information: Character design of Final Fantasy and Template:Final Fantasy characters
The series features a number of recurring character archetypes. Most famously, every game since Final Fantasy II, including subsequent remakes of the original Final Fantasy, features a character named Cid. Cids appearance, personality, goals, and role in the game nonplayable ally, party member, villain vary dramatically. However, two characteristics many versions of Cid have in common are 1 being a scientist or engineer, and 2 being tied in some way to an airship the party eventually acquires. Every Cid has at least one of these two traits.

Biggs and Wedge, inspired by two Star Wars characters of the same name, appear in numerous games as minor characters, sometimes as comic relief.2373 The later games in the series feature several males with effeminate characteristics.8081 Recurring creatures include Chocobos and Moogles.23 Chocobos are large, often flightless birds that appear in several installments as a means of longdistance travel for characters. Moogles, on the other hand, are white, stout creatures resembling teddy bears with wings and a single antenna. They serve different capacities in games including mail delivery, weaponsmiths, party members, and saving the game. Chocobo and Moogle appearances are often accompanied by specific musical themes that have been arranged differently for separate games.32373

Gameplay
Main article: Gameplay of Final Fantasy
In Final Fantasy games, players command a party of characters as they progress through the games story by exploring the game world and defeating opponents.374 Enemies are typically encountered randomly through exploring, a trend which changed in Final Fantasy XI and Final Fantasy XII. The player issues combat orderslike Fight, Magic, and Itemto individual characters via a menudriven interface while engaging in battles. Throughout the series, the games have used different battle systems. Prior to Final Fantasy XI, battles were turnbased with the protagonists and antagonists on different sides of the battlefield. Final Fantasy IV introduced the Active Time Battle ATB system that augmented the turnbased nature with a perpetual timekeeping system. Designed by Hiroyuki Ito, it injected urgency and excitement into combat by requiring the player to act before an enemy attacks, and was used until Final Fantasy X, which implemented the Conditional TurnBased CTB system.32382 This new system returned to the previous turnbased system, but added nuances to offer players more challenge.1983 Final Fantasy XI adopted a realtime battle system where characters continuously act depending on the issued command.84 Final Fantasy XII continued this gameplay with the Active Dimension Battle system.85 Final Fantasy XIIIs combat system, designed by the same man who worked on X,86 was meant to have an actionoriented feel, emulating the cinematic battles in Final Fantasy VII: Advent Children. The latest installment to the franchise, Final Fantasy XV, introduces a new Open Combat system. Unlike previous battle systems in the franchise, the Open Combat system OCS allows players to take on a fully active battle scenario, allowing for free range attacks and movement, giving a much more fluid feel of combat. This system also incorporates a Tactical Option during battle, which pauses active battle to allow use of items.87

Like most RPGs, the Final Fantasy installments use an experience level system for character advancement, in which experience points are accumulated by killing enemies.88899091 Character classes, specific jobs that enable unique abilities for characters, are another recurring theme. Introduced in the first game, character classes have been used differently in each game. Some restrict a character to a single job to integrate it into the story, while other games feature dynamic job systems that allow the player to choose from multiple classes and switch throughout the game. Though used heavily in many games, such systems have become less prevalent in favor of characters that are more versatile; characters still match an archetype, but are able to learn skills outside their class.237374

Magic is another common RPG element in the series. The method by which characters gain magic varies between installments, but is generally divided into classes organized by color: White magic, which focuses on spells that assist teammates; Black magic, which focuses on harming enemies; Red magic, which is a combination of white and black magic, Blue magic, which mimics enemy attacks; and Green magic which focuses on applying status effects to either allies or enemies.37382 Other types of magic frequently appear such as Time magic, focusing on the themes of time, space, and gravity; and Summoning magic, which evokes legendary creatures to aid in battle and is a feature that has persisted since Final Fantasy III. Summoned creatures are often referred to by names like Espers or Eidolons and have been inspired by mythologies from Arabic, Hindu, Norse, and Greek cultures.7374

Different means of transportation have appeared through the series. The most common is the airship for long range travel, accompanied by chocobos for travelling short distances, but others include sea and land vessels. Following Final Fantasy VII, more modern and futuristic vehicle designs have been included.74

Development and history
Origin
See also: Development of Final Fantasy video game and Development of Final Fantasy II
A man sitting in a chair and speaking in a microphone
Hironobu Sakaguchi, creator of the Final Fantasy series
In the mid1980s, Square entered the Japanese video game industry with simple RPGs, racing games, and platformers for Nintendos Famicom Disk System. In 1987, Square designer Hironobu Sakaguchi chose to create a new fantasy roleplaying game for the cartridgebased NES, and drew inspiration from popular fantasy games: Enixs Dragon Quest, Nintendos The Legend of Zelda, and Origin Systemss Ultima series. Though often attributed to the company allegedly facing bankruptcy, Sakaguchi explained that the game was his personal lastditch effort in the game industry and that its title, Final Fantasy, stemmed from his feelings at the time; had the game not sold well, he would have quit the business and gone back to university.929394 Despite his explanation, publications have also attributed the name to the companys hopes that the project would solve its financial troubles.9395 In 2015, Sakaguchi explained the names origin: the team wanted a title that would abbreviate to FF, which would sound good in Japanese. The name was originally going to be Fighting Fantasy, but due to concerns over trademark conflicts with the roleplaying gamebook series of the same name, they needed to settle for something else. As the word Final was a famous word in Japan, Sakaguchi settled on that. According to Sakaguchi, any title that created the FF abbreviation would have done.96

The game indeed reversed Squares lagging fortunes, and it became the companys flagship franchise.4693 Following the success, Square immediately developed a second installment. Because Sakaguchi assumed Final Fantasy would be a standalone game, its story was not designed to be expanded by a sequel. The developers instead chose to carry over only thematic similarities from its predecessor, while some of the gameplay elements, such as the character advancement system, were overhauled. This approach has continued throughout the series; each major Final Fantasy game features a new setting, a new cast of characters, and an upgraded battle system.5 Video game writer John Harris attributed the concept of reworking the game system of each installment to Nihon Falcoms Dragon Slayer series,97 with which Square was previously involved as a publisher.98 The company regularly released new games in the main series. However, the time between the releases of Final Fantasy XI 2002, Final Fantasy XII 2006, and Final Fantasy XIII 2009 were much longer than previous games. Following Final Fantasy XIV, Square Enix stated that it intended to release Final Fantasy games either annually or biennially. This switch was to mimic the development cycles of Western games in the Call of Duty, Assassins Creed and Battlefield series, as well as maintain faninterest.99

Design
See also: Category: Final Fantasy designers
For the original Final Fantasy, Sakaguchi required a larger production team than Squares previous games. He began crafting the games story while experimenting with gameplay ideas. Once the gameplay system and game world size were established, Sakaguchi integrated his story ideas into the available resources. A different approach has been taken for subsequent games; the story is completed first and the game built around it.100 Designers have never been restricted by consistency, though most feel each game should have a minimum number of common elements. The development teams strive to create completely new worlds for each game, and avoid making new games too similar to previous ones. Game locations are conceptualized early in development and design details like building parts are fleshed out as a base for entire structures.72

The first five games were directed by Sakaguchi, who also provided the original concepts.74101 He drew inspiration for game elements from anime films by Hayao Miyazaki; series staples like the airships and chocobos are inspired by elements in Castle in the Sky and Nausica of the Valley of the Wind, respectively.102 Sakaguchi served as a producer for subsequent games until he left Square in 2001.74101 Yoshinori Kitase took over directing the games until Final Fantasy VIII,103104105 and has been followed by a new director for each new game. Hiroyuki Ito designed several gameplay systems, including Final Fantasy Vs Job System, Final Fantasy VIIIs Junction System and the Active Time Battle concept, which was used from Final Fantasy IV until Final Fantasy IX.74103 In designing the Active Time Battle system, Ito drew inspiration from Formula One racing; he thought it would be interesting if character types had different speeds after watching race cars pass each other.106 Ito also codirected Final Fantasy VI with Kitase.74103 Kenji Terada was the scenario writer for the first three games; Kitase took over as scenario writer for Final Fantasy V through Final Fantasy VII. Kazushige Nojima became the series primary scenario writer from Final Fantasy VII until his resignation in October 2003; he has since formed his own company, Stellavista. Nojima partially or completely wrote the stories for Final Fantasy VII, Final Fantasy VIII, Final Fantasy X, and Final Fantasy X2. He also worked as the scenario writer for the spinoff series, Kingdom Hearts.107 Daisuke Watanabe cowrote the scenarios for Final Fantasy X and XII, and was the main writer for the XIII games.108109110


Final Fantasy VI artwork by Yoshitaka Amano, who provided designs for much of the series
Artistic design, including character and monster creations, was handled by Japanese artist Yoshitaka Amano from Final Fantasy through Final Fantasy VI. Amano also handled title logo designs for all of the main series and the image illustrations from Final Fantasy VII onward.101 Tetsuya Nomura was chosen to replace Amano because Nomuras designs were more adaptable to 3D graphics. He worked with the series from Final Fantasy VII through Final Fantasy X;74101 for Final Fantasy IX, however, character designs were handled by Shuk Murase, Toshiyuki Itahana, and Shin Nagasawa.111 Nomura is also the character designer of the Kingdom Hearts series, Compilation of Final Fantasy VII, and Fabula Nova Crystallis: Final Fantasy.112 Other designers include Nobuyoshi Mihara and Akihiko Yoshida. Mihara was the character designer for Final Fantasy XI, and Yoshida served as character designer for Final Fantasy Tactics, the Squareproduced Vagrant Story, and Final Fantasy XII.40113

Graphics and technology
Because of graphical limitations, the first games on the NES feature small sprite representations of the leading party members on the main world screen. Battle screens use more detailed, full versions of characters in a sideview perspective. This practice was used until Final Fantasy VI, which uses detailed versions for both screens. The NES sprites are 26 pixels high and use a color palette of 4 colors. 6 frames of animation are used to depict different character statuses like healthy and fatigued. The SNES installments use updated graphics and effects, as well as higher quality audio than in previous games, but are otherwise similar to their predecessors in basic design. The SNES sprites are 2 pixels shorter, but have larger palettes and feature more animation frames: 11 colors and 40 frames respectively. The upgrade allowed designers to have characters be more detailed in appearance and express more emotions. The first game includes nonplayer characters NPCs the player could interact with, but they are mostly static ingame objects. Beginning with the second game, Square used predetermined pathways for NPCs to create more dynamic scenes that include comedy and drama.114

In 1995, Square showed an interactive SGI technical demonstration of Final Fantasy VI for the then next generation of consoles. The demonstration used Silicon Graphicss prototype Nintendo 64 workstations to create 3D graphics.114115 Fans believed the demo was of a new Final Fantasy game for the Nintendo 64 console; however, 1997 saw the release of Final Fantasy VII for the Sony PlayStation.115116 The switch was due to a dispute with Nintendo over its use of faster but more expensive cartridges, as opposed to the slower and cheaper, but much higher capacity Compact Discs used on rival systems.117118 Final Fantasy VII introduced 3D graphics with fully prerendered backgrounds.117119 It was because of this switch to 3D that a CDROM format was chosen over a cartridge format.117120 The switch also led to increased production costs and a greater subdivision of the creative staff for Final Fantasy VII and subsequent 3D games in the series.72


Final Fantasy VIII, along with VII and IX, used prerendered backgrounds.
Starting with Final Fantasy VIII, the series adopted a more photorealistic look.121122 Like Final Fantasy VII, full motion video FMV sequences would have video playing in the background, with the polygonal characters composited on top. Final Fantasy IX returned to the more stylized design of earlier games in the series, although it still maintained, and in many cases slightly upgraded, most of the graphical techniques used in the previous two games.122 Final Fantasy X was released on the PlayStation 2, and used the more powerful hardware to render graphics in realtime instead of using prerendered material to obtain a more dynamic look; the game features full 3D environments, rather than have 3D character models move about prerendered backgrounds. It is also the first Final Fantasy game to introduce voice acting, occurring throughout the majority of the game, even with many minor characters.19 This aspect added a whole new dimension of depth to the characters reactions, emotions, and development.19123

Taking a temporary divergence, Final Fantasy XI used the PlayStation 2s online capabilities as an MMORPG.124 Initially released for the PlayStation 2 with a PC port arriving six months later, Final Fantasy XI was also released on the Xbox 360 nearly four years after its original release in Japan.125 This was the first Final Fantasy game to use a free rotating camera. Final Fantasy XII was released in 2006 for the PlayStation 2 and uses only half as many polygons as Final Fantasy X, in exchange for more advanced textures and lighting.126127 It also retains the freely rotating camera from Final Fantasy XI. Final Fantasy XIII and Final Fantasy XIV both make use of Crystal Tools, a middleware engine developed by Square Enix.128129

Music
Main article: Music of the Final Fantasy series

Nobuo Uematsu, composer of most of the Final Fantasy soundtracks
The Final Fantasy games feature a variety of music, and frequently reuse themes. Most of the games open with a piece called Prelude, which has evolved from a simple, 2voice arpeggio in the early games to a complex, melodic arrangement in recent installments.237394 Victories in combat are often accompanied by a victory fanfare, a theme that has become one of the most recognized pieces of music in the series. The basic theme that accompanies Chocobo appearances has been rearranged in a different musical style for each installment. A piece called Prologue and sometimes Final Fantasy, originally featured in the first game, is often played during the ending credits.73 Although leitmotifs are common in the more characterdriven installments, theme music is typically reserved for main characters and recurring plot elements.46

Nobuo Uematsu was the chief music composer of the Final Fantasy series until his resignation from Square Enix in November 2004.46 Other composers include Masashi Hamauzu, Hitoshi Sakimoto130131 and Junya Nakano. Uematsu was allowed to create much of the music with little direction from the production staff. Sakaguchi, however, would request pieces to fit specific game scenes including battles and exploring different areas of the game world.132 Once a games major scenarios were completed, Uematsu would begin writing the music based on the story, characters, and accompanying artwork. He started with a games main theme, and developed other pieces to match its style. In creating character themes, Uematsu read the games scenario to determine the characters personality. He would also ask the scenario writer for more details to scenes he was unsure about.133 Technical limitations were prevalent in earlier games; Sakaguchi would sometimes instruct Uematsu to only use specific notes.132 It was not until Final Fantasy IV on the SNES that Uematsu was able to add more subtlety to the music.114

Reception
Overall, the Final Fantasy series has been critically acclaimed and commercially successful, though each installment has seen different levels of success. The series has seen a steady increase in total sales; it sold over 10 million units worldwide by early 1996,134 45 million by August 2003, 63 million by December 2005, and 85 million by July 2008.135136137 In June 2011, Square Enix announced that the series had sold over 100 million units,138 and by March 2014, it had sold over 110 million units.139 Its high sales numbers have ranked it as one of the bestselling video game franchises in the industry; in January 2007, the series was listed as number three, and later in July as number four.46140 As of 2018, the series has sold over 142 million units worldwide.141

Several games within the series have become bestselling games. At the end of 2007, the seventh, eighth, and ninth bestselling RPGs were Final Fantasy VII, Final Fantasy VIII, and Final Fantasy X respectively.142 Final Fantasy VII has sold more than 11 million copies worldwide,143 earning it the position of the bestselling Final Fantasy game.144 Within two days of Final Fantasy VIIIs North American release on September 9, 1999, it became the topselling video game in the United States, a position it held for more than three weeks.145 Final Fantasy X sold over 1.4 million Japanese units in preorders alone, which set a record for the fastestselling console RPG.142146 The MMORPG, Final Fantasy XI, reached over 200,000 active daily players in March 2006147 and had reached over half a million subscribers by July 2007.46 Final Fantasy XII sold more than 1.7 million copies in its first week in Japan.148 By November 6, 2006one week after its releaseFinal Fantasy XII had shipped approximately 1.5 million copies in North America.149 Final Fantasy XIII became the fastestselling game in the franchise,150 and sold one million units on its first day of sale in Japan.151 Final Fantasy XIV: A Realm Reborn, in comparison to its predecessor, was a runaway success, originally suffering from servers being overcrowded,152 and eventually gaining over one million unique subscribers within two months of its launch.153

Critical response
The series has received critical acclaim for the quality of its visuals and soundtracks.46 In 1996, Next Generation ranked the series collectively as the 17th best game of all time, speaking very highly of its graphics, music and stories.154 It was awarded a star on the Walk of Game in 2006, making it the first franchise to win a star on the event other winners were individual games, not franchises. WalkOfGame.com commented that the series has sought perfection as well as having been a risk taker in innovation.155 In 2006, GameFAQs held a contest for the best video game series ever, with Final Fantasy finishing as the runnerup to The Legend of Zelda.156 In a 2008 public poll held by The Game Group plc, Final Fantasy was voted the best game series, with five games appearing in their Greatest Games of All Time list.157

Many Final Fantasy games have been included in various lists of top games. Several games have been listed on multiple IGN Top Games lists.158159160161162163 Eleven games were listed on Famitsus 2006 Top 100 Favorite Games of All Time, four of which were in the top ten, with Final Fantasy X and Final Fantasy VII coming first and second, respectively.164 The series holds seven Guinness World Records in the Guinness World Records Gamers Edition 2008, which include the Most Games in an RPG Series 13 main games, seven enhanced games, and 32 spinoff games, the Longest Development Period the production of Final Fantasy XII took five years, and the FastestSelling Console RPG in a Single Day Final Fantasy X.142165 The 2009 edition listed two games from the series among the top 50 consoles games: Final Fantasy XII at number 8 and Final Fantasy VII at number 20.166

However, the series has garnered some criticism. IGN has commented that the menu system used by the games is a major detractor for many and is a significant reason why they havent touched the series.23 The site has also heavily criticized the use of random encounters in the series battle systems.167168 IGN further stated the various attempts to bring the series into film and animation have either been unsuccessful, unremarkable, or did not live up to the standards of the games.11 In 2007, Edge criticized the series for a number of related games that include the phrase Final Fantasy in their titles, which are considered inferior to previous games. It also commented that with the departure of Hironobu Sakaguchi, the series might be in danger of growing stale.46

Several individual Final Fantasy games have garnered extra attention; some for their positive reception and others for their negative reception. Final Fantasy VII topped GamePros 26 Best RPGs of All Time list,169 as well as GameFAQs Best Game Ever audience polls in 2004 and 2005.170171 Despite the success of Final Fantasy VII, it is sometimes criticized as being overrated. In 2003, GameSpy listed it as the seventh most overrated game of all time, while IGN presented views from both sides.172173 Dirge of Cerberus: Final Fantasy VII shipped 392,000 units in its first week of release, but received review scores that were much lower than that of other Final Fantasy games.174175176 A delayed, negative review after the Japanese release of Dirge of Cerberus from Japanese gaming magazine Famitsu hinted at a controversy between the magazine and Square Enix.177 Though Final Fantasy: The Spirits Within was praised for its visuals, the plot was criticized and the film was considered a box office bomb.454647178 Final Fantasy Crystal Chronicles for the GameCube received overall positive review scores, but reviews stated that the use of Game Boy Advances as controllers was a big detractor.116179 The predominantly negative reception of the original version of Final Fantasy XIV caused thenpresident Yoichi Wada to issue an official apology during a Tokyo press conference, stating that the brand had been greatly damaged by the games reception.180

Rankings and aggregators
Several video game publications have created rankings of the mainline Final Fantasy games. In the table below, the lower the number given, the better the game is in the view of the respective publication. By way of comparison, the rating provided by the review aggregator Metacritic is also given; in this row higher numbers indicate better reviews.

Publication181IIIIIIIVVVIVIIVIIIIXXXIXIIXIIIXIVXV
Gamespot1827079838595951839518485938290859080
Game Informer 201818543125
Polygon 2018186141512431856101121379
Rock, Paper, Shotgun 2018187783142 X 
9 X265
IGN 2018188712845161139210
VG247 201818994325186107
GamesRadar 201719013410137511 X 
9 X214215 original 
6 L. R.812
VentureBeat 2016191121413103259171541186
Digital Spy 2016192121110785261439
Kotaku 2013193101183514627912
Metacritic rating19479797785839292909492 X 
85 X28592838319585196
Impact and legacy
The Final Fantasy series and several specific games within it have been credited for introducing and popularizing many concepts that are today widely used in console RPGs.3116 The original game is often cited as one of the most influential early console RPGs, and played a major role in legitimizing and popularizing the genre. Many console RPGs featured oneonone battles against monsters from a firstperson perspective. Final Fantasy introduced a side view perspective with groups of monsters against a group of characters that has been frequently used.394116 It also introduced an early evolving class change system,197198 as well as different methods of transportation, including a ship, canoe, and flying airship.199 Final Fantasy II was the first sequel in the industry to omit characters and locations from the previous game.5 It also introduced an activitybased progression system,200 which has been used in later RPG series such as SaGa,201 Grandia,202 and The Elder Scrolls.200 Final Fantasy III introduced the job system, a character progression engine allowing the player to change character classes, as well as acquire new and advanced classes and combine class abilities, at any time during the game.203 Final Fantasy IV is considered a milestone for the genre, introducing a dramatic storyline with a strong emphasis on character development and personal relationships.204 Final Fantasy VII is credited as having the largest industry impact of the series,117 and with allowing console roleplaying games to gain massmarket appeal.205

The series affected Squares business on several levels. The commercial failure of Final Fantasy: The Spirits Within resulted in hesitation and delays from Enix during merger discussions with Square.4794 Squares decision to produce games exclusively for the Sony PlayStationa move followed by Enixs decision with the Dragon Quest seriessevered their relationship with Nintendo.3116 Final Fantasy games were absent from Nintendo consoles, specifically the Nintendo 64, for seven years.100117 Critics attribute the switch of strong thirdparty games like the Final Fantasy and Dragon Quest games to Sonys PlayStation, and away from the Nintendo 64, as one of the reasons behind PlayStation being the more successful of the two consoles.3116120 The release of the Nintendo GameCube, which used optical disc media, in 2001 caught the attention of Square. To produce games for the system, Square created the shell company The Game Designers Studio and released Final Fantasy Crystal Chronicles, which spawned its own metaseries within the main franchise.38 Final Fantasy XIs lack of an online method of subscription cancellation prompted the creation of legislation in Illinois that requires internet gaming services to provide such a method to the states residents.206

The series popularity has resulted in its appearance and reference in numerous facets of popular culture like anime, TV series, and webcomics.207208209 Music from the series has permeated into different areas of culture. Final Fantasy IVs Theme of Love was integrated into the curriculum of Japanese school children and has been performed live by orchestras and metal bands.210 In 2003, Uematsu cofounded The Black Mages, a instrumental rock group independent of Square that has released albums of arranged Final Fantasy tunes.211212 Bronze medalists Alison Bartosik and Anna Kozlova performed their synchronized swimming routine at the 2004 Summer Olympics to music from Final Fantasy VIII.142 Many of the soundtracks have also been released for sale. Numerous companion books, which normally provide indepth game information, have been published. In Japan, they are published by Square and are called Ultimania books.213214

See also
flagJapan portal
Final Fantasy portal
Dragon Quest  Initially a competing series from Enix, continues to be produced alongside Final Fantasy after their merger with Square
Kingdom Hearts  An RPG series developed by Square Enix in collaboration with the American company Disney. It includes both Disneyrelated and Final Fantasy characters
Granblue Fantasy  a 2013 video game featuring key staff from Final Fantasy
The Last Story  a 2012 video game featuring key staff from Final Fantasy
List of Square Enix franchises
List of Japanese roleplaying game franchises
 Final Fantasy series  Wikipedia book
Notes
 Final Fantasy  Fainaru Fantaj
References
 Jason Schreier July 8, 2012. What In The World Is Final Fantasy? A Beginners Guide To The Biggest RPG Series On The Planet. Kotaku. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved 20130516.
 Final Fantasy  Release Summary. GameSpot. Archived from the original on February 10, 2009. Retrieved August 2, 2011.
 Vestal, Andrew. The Main Final Fantasies. The History of Final Fantasy. GameSpot. Archived from the original on August 3, 2011. Retrieved August 2, 2011.
 Final Fantasy II  Release Summary. GameSpot. Archived from the original on February 10, 2009. Retrieved August 2, 2011.
 Final Fantasy Retrospective Part II. GameTrailers. July 23, 2007. Archived from the original on June 28, 2009. Retrieved August 4, 2011.
 Final Fantasy III  Release Summary. GameSpot. Archived from the original on February 14, 2009. Retrieved August 2, 2011.
 Final Fantasy II SNES  Release Summary. GameSpot. Archived from the original on February 13, 2009. Retrieved August 2, 2011.
 Square Co, ed. 1991. Final Fantasy II instruction manual. Square Co. p. 74. SFSF4USA1.
 Final Fantasy Chronicles. IGN. July 18, 2001. Archived from the original on August 3, 2011. Retrieved August 2, 2011.
 Final Fantasy V  Release Summary. GameSpot. Archived from the original on February 13, 2009. Retrieved August 2, 2011.
 Isler, Ramsey December 17, 2007. Gaming to Anime: Final Fantasy VI. IGN. Archived from the original on August 3, 2011. Retrieved August 2, 2011.
 Final Fantasy III SNES  Release Summary. GameSpot. Archived from the original on September 13, 2011. Retrieved August 2, 2011.
 Final Fantasy VIII  Release Summary. GameSpot. Archived from the original on April 15, 2009. Retrieved August 2, 2011.
 Final Fantasy IX  Release Summary. GameSpot. Archived from the original on April 30, 2011. Retrieved August 2, 2011.
 Final Fantasy X  PlayStation 2  IGN. IGN. Retrieved 20121018.
 Final Fantasy XI  PlayStation 2  IGN. IGN. Retrieved 20121018.
 Final Fantasy XII  PlayStation 2  IGN. IGN. Retrieved 20121018.
 Final Fantasy X  Release Summary. GameSpot. Archived from the original on July 11, 2011. Retrieved August 2, 2011.
 Final Fantasy Retrospective Part VII. GameTrailers. August 28, 2007. Archived from the original on June 22, 2009. Retrieved August 4, 2011.
 Final Fantasy XI  Release Summary. GameSpot. Archived from the original on May 25, 2009. Retrieved August 2, 2011.
 Final Fantasy Retrospective Part VIII. GameTrailers. September 4, 2007. Archived from the original on June 22, 2009. Retrieved August 4, 2011.
 Final Fantasy XII  Release Summary. GameSpot. Archived from the original on August 11, 2011. Retrieved August 2, 2011.
 Kolan, Patrick January 18, 2007. The Evolution of Final Fantasy. IGN. Archived from the original on August 3, 2011. Retrieved August 2, 2011.
 Interview. FFWorld.com in French. 2004. Archived from the original on October 11, 2007. Retrieved 20070525.
 Thang, Jimmy July 14, 2008. E3 2008: Final Fantasy XIII Coming to Xbox 360. IGN. Archived from the original on August 3, 2011. Retrieved August 2, 2011.
 Magrino, Tom May 5, 2009. Square Enix fasttracking FFXIII localization  Report. GameSpot. Archived from the original on August 3, 2011. Retrieved August 2, 2011.
 Gantayat, Anoop May 17, 2006. Famitsu with More on Fabula Nova. IGN. Archived from the original on August 3, 2011. Retrieved August 2, 2011.
 Yoon, Andrew October 24, 2013. Fabula Nova Crystallis  a decade of Final Fantasy XIII: an interview with producer Yoshinori Kitase. Shacknews. Archived from the original on March 6, 2016. Retrieved 20131026.
 Final Fantasy XIV Online Release. GameSpot. Archived from the original on August 17, 2011. Retrieved August 2, 2011.
 Andrew Webster June 10, 2013. Sony reveals new PlayStation 4 games at E3, including Final Fantasy XV, The Order: 1886 and Transistor. TheVerge. Archived from the original on June 14, 2013. Retrieved 20130610.
 Brown, Peter August 6, 2015. Final Fantasy 15 Release Date Confirmed for 2016. GameSpot. Archived from the original on August 6, 2015. Retrieved 20150806.
 Interview: Tetsuya Nomura. Edge Online. June 25, 2007. Archived from the original on November 3, 2013. Retrieved 20110827.
 Schammell, David February 13, 2014. Final Fantasy 15 quite far into development, given high priority by Square. VideoGamer.com. Archived from the original on February 13, 2014. Retrieved 20140213.
 PS4XVFF. Famitsu. September 20, 2013. Archived from the original on January 28, 2014. Retrieved January 28, 2014.
 Juba, Joe May 2016. Final Fantasy XV  The Clearing Storm. Game Informer. GameStop 277: 3864.
 XVJust Cause 3gamescom 2015 in Japanese. Famitsu. August 7, 2015. Archived from the original on August 7, 2015. Retrieved August 7, 2015.
 Gamescom 2015: Hajime Tabata Interview English. Finaland. August 11, 2015. Archived from the original on August 11, 2015. Retrieved August 15, 2015.
 Final Fantasy Retrospective Part XI. GameTrailers. October 10, 2007. Archived from the original on June 9, 2009. Retrieved August 4, 2011.
 Final Fantasy Retrospective Part X. GameTrailers. September 25, 2007. Archived from the original on June 5, 2009. Retrieved August 4, 2011.
 Final Fantasy Retrospective Part IX. GameTrailers. September 15, 2007. Archived from the original on June 9, 2009. Retrieved August 4, 2011.
 Tetsuya Nomura Interview. Edge 177. Future Publishing. July 2007. pp. 8081.
 Final Fantasy X2  Release Summary. GameSpot. Archived from the original on August 18, 2011. Retrieved August 2, 2011.
 Clements, Ryan August 14, 2009. Dissidia Final Fantasy Review. IGN. Archived from the original on August 3, 2011. Retrieved August 2, 2011.
 Clements, Ryan February 22, 2011. Heroes of Dissidia 012 Final Fantasy. IGN. Archived from the original on August 3, 2011. Retrieved August 2, 2011.
 Overview over Final Fantasy: The Spirits Within reviews. Metacritic. Archived from the original on August 3, 2011. Retrieved August 3, 2011.
 Final Frontiers. Edge. Future Publishing 177: 7279. June 25, 2007. Archived from the original on July 6, 2011. Retrieved August 3, 2011.
 Long, Andrew 2003. SquareEnix Gives Chrono Break Trademark Some Playmates. RPGamer. Archived from the original on August 3, 2011. Retrieved August 3, 2011.
 Studio BentStuff, ed. 2008. Final Fantasy 20th Anniversary Ultimania File 2: Scenario in Japanese. Square Enix. p. 226. ISBN 9784757522510.
 McLaughlin, Rus April 30, 2008. IGN Presents: The History of Final Fantasy VII. IGN. Archived from the original on September 17, 2008. Retrieved September 14, 2008.
 Santos, Carlo April 28, 2006. Anime News Network: Final Fantasy VII Advent Children review. Anime News Network. Archived from the original on August 8, 2009. Retrieved August 2, 2009.
 Mielke, James September 16, 2005. Final Fantasy VII Advent Children review. 1UP.com. Archived from the original on October 3, 2012. Retrieved February 25, 2008.
 Beckett, Michael. Final Fantasy VII Advent Children  Staff Review. RPGamer. Archived from the original on November 13, 2010. Retrieved August 3, 2010.
 Final Fantasy VII Advent Children Complete. Square Enix. May 12, 2009. Archived from the original on February 21, 2012. Retrieved February 19, 2011.
 Crocker, Janet; Smith, Lesley; Henderson, Tim; Arnold, Adam. The Legacy of Final Fantasy VII. AnimeFringe. Archived from the original on May 29, 2008. Retrieved August 5, 2008.
 Douglass Jr., Todd March 7, 2007. Final Fantasy VII  Advent Children: Limited Edition. DVD Talk. Archived from the original on March 23, 2010. Retrieved August 11, 2010.
 Carle, Chris February 16, 2007. Double Dip Digest: Final Fantasy VII: Advent Children Limited Edition Collectors Set. IGN. Archived from the original on July 7, 2012. Retrieved August 5, 2008.
 McCarthy, Dave April 28, 2008. Crisis Core: Final Fantasy VII UK Interview. IGN. Archived from the original on February 21, 2009. Retrieved March 8, 2009.
 Sato March 30, 2016. Kingsglaive: Final Fantasy XV Revealed As An Advent ChildrenStyle CGI Film. Siliconera. Archived from the original on March 31, 2016. Retrieved March 31, 2016.
 Sato March 31, 2016. Kingsglaive: Final Fantasy XV Is Being Directed By Advent Children Director. Siliconera. Archived from the original on March 31, 2016. Retrieved March 31, 2016.
 Lada, Jenni March 30, 2016. Brotherhood: Final Fantasy XV Follows Noctis From Childhood To Adulthood. Siliconera. Archived from the original on March 31, 2016. Retrieved March 31, 2016.
 FFXVFINAL FANTASY XV UNIVERSEUNCOVERED FINAL FANTASY XV. Famitsu. April 1, 2016. Archived from the original on April 1, 2016. Retrieved April 1, 2016.
 2 . Yahoo! Japan: Books in Japanese. Yahoo!. Archived from the original on August 3, 2011. Retrieved August 3, 2011.
  3 3. Yahoo! Japan: Books in Japanese. Yahoo!. Archived from the original on August 3, 2011. Retrieved August 3, 2011.
 Final Fantasy: The Spirits Within Mass Market Paperback. Amazon.com. ISBN 0743424190. Archived from the original on August 3, 2011.
 FF Crystal Chronicles Goes Comic. IGN. December 18, 2003. Archived from the original on August 3, 2011. Retrieved August 3, 2011.
 11 . Yahoo! Japan: Books in Japanese. Yahoo!. Archived from the original on August 3, 2011. Retrieved August 3, 2011.
 Final Fantasy XI T1 in French. Fleuve Noir. Archived from the original on August 3, 2011. Retrieved August 3, 2011.
 Final Fantasy: Unlimited To End at 26. Anime News Network. March 20, 2002. Archived from the original on August 3, 2011. Retrieved August 3, 2011.
 Fahey, Mike. Oh No, The Final Fantasy Trading Card Game Launches in English Next Month. Kotaku. Retrieved 20171003.
 Duffy, Owen 20170507. The Final Fantasy Trading Card Game Unpicks a Very Particular Secret of Mana. Retrieved 20171003.
 Vincent, Brittany 20170713. Final Fantasys Trading Card Game is Getting Its Own Tournament. Retrieved 20171003.
 Morris, Dave 2004. Insider Secrets: Final Fantasy X2. The Art of Game Worlds. HarperCollins. pp. 98102. ISBN 0060724307.
 Vestal, Andrew. Final Fantasy Series. The History of Final Fantasy. GameSpot. Archived from the original on July 9, 2006. Retrieved August 4, 2011.
 Final Fantasy Retrospective Part XIII. GameTrailers. November 2, 2007. Archived from the original on September 5, 2013. Retrieved August 4, 2011.
 Craig, Timothy J. 2000. Japan Pop!: Inside the World of Japanese Popular Culture. M.E. Sharpe. ISBN 0765605619.
 Clarke, Andy; Mitchell, Grethe 2007. Videogames and art. Intellect. ISBN 9781841509549.
 Interivew with Yoshinori Kitase and Tetsuya Nomura. Electronic Gaming Monthly 196. October 2005. Archived from the original on August 5, 2011. Retrieved August 4, 2011.
 Smith, Luke June 7, 2006. FFXIII Interview: Nomura, Kitase, Hashimoto and Toriyama. 1up.com. Archived from the original on August 5, 2011. Retrieved August 4, 2011.
 Fahey, Rob October 31, 2006. This Great Fantasy Interview. Eurogamer. p. 2. Archived from the original on January 25, 2009. Retrieved August 4, 2011.
 Cork, Jeff February 28, 2007. Ten Gaming Clichs. Game Informer. Archived from the original on October 10, 2007. Retrieved August 4, 2011.
 Final Fantasy XII QA. IGN. November 20, 2003. Archived from the original on August 5, 2011. Retrieved August 4, 2011.
 Jenkins, David February 28, 2007. Never the Final Fantasy. Virgin Media. Archived from the original on August 5, 2011. Retrieved August 4, 2011.
 Final Fantasy X PS2 Reviews. 1UP.com. January 1, 2000. Archived from the original on August 5, 2011. Retrieved August 4, 2011.
 Bramwell, Tom January 2, 2002. Final Fantasy XI. Eurogamer. Archived from the original on March 10, 2009. Retrieved August 4, 2011.
 BradyGAMES, ed. 2006. Final Fantasy XII Official Strategy Guide. DKPublishing. pp. 3536. ISBN 0744008379.
 Gantayat, Anoop May 9, 2006. E3 2006: FFXIII Staff Check. IGN. News Corporation. Archived from the original on April 3, 2008. Retrieved 20081215.
 Bramwell, Tom June 7, 2006. FF to look like Advent Children?. Eurogamer. Archived from the original on June 24, 2009. Retrieved 20080727.
 Loguidice, Bill; Barton, Matt 2009. Vintage Games. Focal PressElsevier. ISBN 9780240811468.
 David Cassady. 1999. Final Fantasy Anthology Official Strategy Guide. BradyGames. ISBN 1566869250.
 Sutajio bento sutaffu. 2004. Final Fantasy VIII Ultimania in Japanese. Studio BentStuff. ISBN 4757512430.
 Sutajio bento sutaffu. 2004. Final Fantasy X2 Ultimania Omega in Japanese. SquareEnix. ISBN 4757511612.
 Fear, Ed December 13, 2007. Sakaguchi discusses the development of Final Fantasy. Develop. Intent Media. Archived from the original on August 5, 2011. Retrieved August 4, 2011.
 Berardini, Csar A. April 26, 2006. An Introduction to SquareEnix. TeamXbox. IGN. Archived from the original on August 5, 2011. Retrieved August 4, 2011.
 Final Fantasy Retrospective Part I. GameTrailers. July 15, 2007. Archived from the original on June 8, 2009. Retrieved August 4, 2011.
 Vestal, Andrew. The History of Final Fantasy: Introduction. The History of Final Fantasy. GameSpot. Archived from the original on February 10, 2009. Retrieved August 4, 2011.
 FF. Famitsu. May 24, 2015. Archived from the original on May 26, 2015. Retrieved 20150529.
 John Harris July 2, 2009. Game Design Essentials: 20 RPGs  Dragon Slayer. Gamasutra. p. 13. Archived from the original on October 12, 2011. Retrieved August 4, 2011.
 Kurt Kalata. Dragon Slayer. Hardcore Gaming 101. Archived from the original on August 5, 2011. Retrieved August 4, 2011.
 YinPoole, Wesley November 21, 2011. SE wants to release a Final Fantasy every year or two. Eurogamer. Archived from the original on November 23, 2011. Retrieved November 22, 2011.
 Kent, Steven 2001. The Mainstream and All Its Perils. Ultimate History of Video Games. Three Rivers Press. pp. 541542. ISBN 0761536434.
 Vestal, Andrew. Staff Spotlight. The History of Final Fantasy. GameSpot. Archived from the original on July 9, 2006. Retrieved August 4, 2011.
 Rogers, Tim March 27, 2006. In Defense of Final Fantasy XII. Edge. Next Generation. Archived from the original on August 31, 2013. Retrieved August 4, 2011.
 Final Fantasy III SNES  Tech Info. GameSpot. Archived from the original on February 12, 2009. Retrieved August 4, 2011.
 Final Fantasy VII  Tech Info. GameSpot. Archived from the original on August 5, 2011. Retrieved August 4, 2011.
 Final Fantasy VIII  Tech Info. GameSpot. Archived from the original on April 12, 2009. Retrieved August 4, 2011.
 Jeremy Parish. 30 Things You Probably Didnt Know About Final Fantasy. 1UP.com. p. 6. Archived from the original on August 5, 2011. Retrieved August 4, 2011.
 McWhertor, Michael January 25, 2008. Super Smash Bros. Brawl Storyline Penned By Final Fantasy VII Writer. Kotaku. Archived from the original on August 5, 2011. Retrieved August 4, 2011.
 Studio BentStuff. Final Fantasy X Ultimania Omega in Japanese. Square Enix. pp. 191193, 476.
 Video interview with FINAL FANTASY XII Directors. FINAL FANTASY XII Collectors Edition Bonus DVD. Square Enix Co., Ltd. October 31, 2006. Archived from the original on December 6, 2013. Retrieved April 8, 2011. Hiroshi Minagawa: In the course of development, Jun Akiyama and Daisuke Watanabe came up with many ideas but ultimately we had to abandon many of them. Id heard their original ideas and I wish we could have included them all. Once we began development and many of the systems were in place, the team had many progressive ideas. It was the most enjoyable part of the project. But as we approached the projects end, I had to point out features we had to drop in order for the game to be finished. Which is unfortunate, since Im sure people would have enjoyed the game that much more if we could have left all our original ideas in.
 XIII REMINISCENCE tracer of memories Final Fantasy XIII: Reminiscence tracer of memories: Interview with author Daisuke Watanabe. Famitsu. July 11, 2014. Archived from the original on July 11, 2014. Retrieved 20140711.
 Final Fantasy IX  Tech Info. GameSpot. Archived from the original on August 5, 2011. Retrieved August 4, 2011.
 The Hot 100 Game Developers of 2007. Edge. Next Generation. March 3, 2007. Archived from the original on August 5, 2011. Retrieved August 4, 2011.
 Final Fantasy XI Tech Info. Archived from the original on August 5, 2011. Retrieved August 4, 2011.
 Final Fantasy Retrospective Part IV. GameTrailers. August 5, 2007. Archived from the original on June 11, 2009. Retrieved August 4, 2011.
 Vestal, Andrew. Related Final Fantasies. The History of Final Fantasy. GameSpot. Archived from the original on July 14, 2006. Retrieved August 4, 2011.
 Casamassina, Matt July 19, 2005. State of the RPG: GameCube. IGN. Archived from the original on August 5, 2011. Retrieved August 4, 2011.
 Final Fantasy Retrospective Part V. GameTrailers. August 13, 2007. Archived from the original on June 11, 2009. Retrieved August 6, 2011.
 10 Years of PlayStation Through the Eyes of PSM. PlayStation: The Official Magazine. Future Publishing 127: 3443. September 2007.
 Final Fantasy VII PS1  Review. 1UP.com. May 9, 2004. Archived from the original on August 5, 2011. Retrieved August 4, 2011.
 Buchanan, Levi September 30, 2008. Nintendo 64 Week: Day Two. IGN. Archived from the original on August 5, 2011. Retrieved August 4, 2011.
 Interview with Final Fantasy VIII developers in Japanese. Famitsu Weekly. June 5, 1998. Archived from the original Translation by Coxon, Sachi on August 5, 2011. Retrieved August 4, 2011.
 Final Fantasy Retrospective Part VI. GameTrailers. August 20, 2007. Archived from the original on June 4, 2009. Retrieved August 4, 2011.
 Behind The Game The Creators. Square Enix. 2001. Archived from the original on August 5, 2011. Retrieved August 4, 2011.
 Final Fantasy XI  Big Plans, Big Money. IGN. May 10, 2002. Archived from the original on August 5, 2011. Retrieved August 4, 2011.
 Thorsen, Tor April 17, 2006. Shippin Out 417421: Final Fantasy XI Online, Brain Age. GameSpot. Archived from the original on February 10, 2009. Retrieved August 4, 2011.
 Final Fantasy XII PS2 Previews. 1UP.com. November 9, 2003. Archived from the original on August 5, 2011. Retrieved August 4, 2011.
 Winkler, Chris December 4, 2003. Final Fantasy XII  Preview First Look. RPGFan. Archived from the original on August 5, 2011. Retrieved August 4, 2011.
 Shoemaker, Brad; Tochen, Dan May 8, 2006. E3 06: Square Enix announces trio of Final Fantasy XIII games. GameSpot. Archived from the original on November 18, 2006. Retrieved August 4, 2011.
 Yoon, Andrew February 22, 2008. GDC08: Square Enix unveils Crystal Tools engine. Joystiq. Archived from the original on August 5, 2011. Retrieved August 4, 2011.
 Artist: . MusicBrainz. Archived from the original on August 5, 2011. Retrieved August 4, 2011.
 Artist: . MusicBrainz. Archived from the original on August 5, 2011. Retrieved August 4, 2011.
 Mielke, James February 15, 2008. A Day in the Life of Final Fantasys Nobuo Uematsu. 1UP.com. Archived from the original on August 5, 2011. Retrieved August 4, 2011.
 VanBurkleo, Meagan May 25, 2009. Nobuo Uematsu: The Man Behind The Music. Game Informer. Archived from the original on June 5, 2009. Retrieved August 4, 2011.
 Final Fantasy VII, Computer and Video Games, no. 174, pp. 10611, May 1996
 Square Enix announces Song Summoner: The Unsung Heroes Press release. Square Enix. July 7, 2008. Archived from the original on August 2, 2011. Retrieved August 2, 2011.
 Square Enix U.S.A. announces details for Final Fantasy XI. Square Enix. August 11, 2003. Archived from the original on August 2, 2011. Retrieved August 2, 2011.
 Official Xbox Magazine press release Playable Beta Disc for Xbox 360 Console to be included with February 2006 Issue PDF. Square Enix. December 19, 2005. Archived from the original PDF on August 2, 2011. Retrieved August 2, 2011.
 Rose, Mike June 7, 2011. Final Fantasy Series Hits 100M Units Shipped. Gamasutra. Archived from the original on August 2, 2011. Retrieved August 2, 2011.
 Businesses  SQUARE ENIX HOLDINGS CO., LTD. Square Enix. March 31, 2014. Archived from the original on September 22, 2014. Retrieved 20140815.
 RansomWiley, James January 10, 2007. Nintendo holds key to franchise longevity, profitability. Joystiq. Archived from the original on August 2, 2011. Retrieved August 2, 2011.
 TOMB RAIDER LEGENDS: THE BOARD GAME COMING FEBRUARY 2019. Gamasutra. Oct 3, 2018. Retrieved Oct 23, 2018.
 Craig Glenday, ed. March 11, 2008. Record Breaking Games: RolePlaying Games. Guinness World Records Gamers Edition 2008. Guinness World Records. Guinness. pp. 156167. ISBN 9781904994213.
 Yip, Spencer August 19, 2015. Final Fantasy VII Has Sold Over 11 Million Units Worldwide. Siliconera. Curse, Inc. Archived from the original on March 24, 2016. Retrieved March 26, 2017.
 Square Enix Announces Release Date of Final Fantasy VII Advent Children. Square Enix. May 15, 2005. Archived from the original on August 2, 2011. Retrieved August 2, 2011.
 Final Fantasy VIII Tops Videogame Charts. IGN. October 5, 1999. Archived from the original on August 2, 2011. Retrieved August 2, 2011.
 Final Fantasy X Sells Like Crazy; World Not Shocked. IGN. July 19, 2001. Archived from the original on August 2, 2011. Retrieved August 2, 2011.
 Woodard, Christopher March 24, 2006. GDC: Creating a Global MMO: Balancing Cultures and Platforms in Final Fantasy XI. Gamasutra. Archived from the original on December 7, 2010. Retrieved August 6, 2011.
 Jenkins, David March 24, 2006. Japanese Sales Charts, Week Ending March 19. Media Create. Gamasutra. Archived from the original on August 5, 2011. Retrieved August 2, 2011.
 Square Enix Announces Record Shipment With Final Fantasy XII. Square Enix. November 6, 2006. Archived from the original on August 2, 2011. Retrieved August 2, 2011.
 Sharkey, Mike March 19, 2010. Final Fantasy XIII: Biggest First Week in Franchise History. GameSpy. Archived from the original on May 7, 2011. Retrieved 20100319.
 Alexander, Leigh December 18, 2009. FFXIII Tops 1 Million Units Day One. Gamasutra. Archived from the original on May 10, 2010. Retrieved 20091218.
 Plunkett, Luke August 25, 2013. Early Final Fantasy XIV Launch Goes Surprise! Badly. Kotaku. Archived from the original on August 27, 2013. Retrieved August 25, 2013.
 Ligman, Kris October 30, 2013. Final Fantasy XIV hits 1.5M registrations after relaunch woes. Gamasutra. Think Services. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved October 31, 2013.
 Top 100 Games of All Time. Next Generation. No. 21. United States: Imagine Media. September 1996. p. 64.
 2006 Walk of Game Inductees. Walk of Game. Archived from the original on July 2, 2008. Retrieved August 2, 2011.
 Summer 2006: Best. Series. Ever. GameFAQs. Archived from the original on June 6, 2009. Retrieved August 6, 2011.
 Greatest Games Results. The Game Group plc. 2008. Archived from the original on February 6, 2009. Retrieved August 6, 2011.
 IGNs Top 100 Games. IGN. 2003. Archived from the original on February 22, 2009. Retrieved August 6, 2011.
 IGNs Top 100 Games. IGN. 2005. Archived from the original on February 27, 2009. Retrieved August 6, 2011.
 Top 99 Games of All Time: Readers Pick. IGN. 2005. Archived from the original on February 18, 2009. Retrieved August 6, 2011.
 IGN PlayStation Team March 16, 2007. The Top 25 PS2 Games of All Time. IGN. Archived from the original on February 28, 2009. Retrieved August 6, 2011.
 Top 100 PlayStation 2 Games. IGN. Archived from the original on June 18, 2013. Retrieved November 17, 2012.
 Top 100 PlayStation 2 Games. IGN. Archived from the original on June 18, 2013. Retrieved November 17, 2012.
 Campbell, Colin 2006. Japan Votes on All Time Top 100. Edge. Archived from the original on August 6, 2011. Retrieved August 6, 2011.
 Parsons, Doug July 30, 2008. Record Breaking Final Fantasy Series heads to The Record Breaking Nintendo DS. Guinness World Records. Archived from the original on June 2, 2009. Retrieved August 6, 2011.
 Top 50 Console Games. Guinness World Records 2009 Gamers Edition. Guinness World Records. Guinness. February 3, 2009. pp. 190191. ISBN 9781904994459.
 Lundigran, Jeff September 10, 1999. IGN: Final Fantasy VIII Review. IGN. Archived from the original on February 11, 2009. Retrieved August 6, 2011.
 Smith, David November 22, 2000. IGN: Final Fantasy IX Review. IGN. Archived from the original on February 12, 2009. Retrieved August 6, 2011.
 The 26 Best RPGs of the All Time. GamePro. November 5, 2008. Archived from the original on August 6, 2011. Retrieved August 6, 2011.
 Spring 2004: Best. Game. Ever. GameFAQs. Archived from the original on February 9, 2009. Retrieved August 6, 2011.
 Fall 2005: 10Year Anniversary ContestThe 10 Best Games Ever. GameFAQs. Archived from the original on March 16, 2009. Retrieved August 6, 2011.
 25 Most Overrated Games of All Time. GameSpy. September 2003. Archived from the original on April 12, 2009. Retrieved August 6, 2011.
 Buchanan, Levi March 3, 2009. Is Final Fantasy VII Overrated?. IGN. Archived from the original on March 10, 2009. Retrieved August 6, 2011.
 Top 10 Weekly Software Sales. January 2329, 2006. Archived from the original on February 5, 2006. Retrieved August 6, 2011.
 Dirge of Cerberus: Final Fantasy VII Reviews. GameRankings. Archived from the original on June 25, 2009. Retrieved August 6, 2011.
 Dirge of Cerberus: Final Fantasy VII Reviews. Metacritic. Archived from the original on August 6, 2011. Retrieved August 6, 2011.
 Dormer, Dan February 8, 2006. Famitsu Digs Into Dirge of Cerberus. 1UP.com. Archived from the original on August 6, 2011. Retrieved August 6, 2011.
 Ebert, Roger July 11, 2001. Final Fantasy: The Spirits Within. RogerEbert.com. Archived from the original on June 20, 2009. Retrieved August 6, 2011.
 Reviews: FF: Crystal Chronicles. 1UP.com. January 1, 2000. Archived from the original on August 6, 2011. Retrieved August 6, 2011.
 Gantayat, Anoop September 27, 2011. Square Enix CEO: Final Fantasy XIV Damaged FF Brand. Andriasang.com. Archived from the original on December 25, 2012. Retrieved December 1, 2013.
 Includes only sources deemed reliable per Wikipedias internal guideline WP:VGRS.
 Official Final Fantasy Scores given by GameSpot corresponding with the Metacritic scores selected platform. First 3 games with the highest scores belong to the top 3. Accessed 6 November 2018.
 Final Fantasy VII Review. Gamespot. Retrieved 6 November 2018.
 Final Fantasy VIII Review. Gamespot. Retrieved 6 November 2018.
 The Top 100 RPGs Of All Time. Gameinformer. 1 January 2018. Retrieved 6 November 2018. Note: It shows these Final Fantasy games do not only rank higher then the other Final Fantasy games, but are also part of the top 100 RPGs of all time.
 Parish, Jeremy 19 December 2017. Ranking the numbered Final Fantasy games. Polygon. Retrieved 15 July 2018.
 The Best of Final Fantasy. Rock, Paper, Shotgun. 2 March 2018. Retrieved 15 July 2018.
 Ranking the Final Fantasy Games. IGN. 15 May 2016. Retrieved 15 July 2018.
 Final Fantasy is nearly 30, so lets rank the 10 best games in the series  VG247. VG247. 5 December 2017. Retrieved 15 July 2018.
 Agnello, Anthony John 22 February 2017. The 25 best Final Fantasy games. Gamesradar. Retrieved 15 July 2018. Note: To make ranks comparable this list skips the ranks given to nonmainline games.
 Minotti, Mike 12 December 2016. Final Fantasy I to XV: Ranking the series from worst to best. VentureBeat. Retrieved 15 July 2018.
 Reynolds, Matthew 19 July 2016. Ranking the Final Fantasy games from worst to best. Digital Spy. Retrieved 15 July 2018.
 Schreier, Jason 29 January 2013. Lets Rank The Final Fantasy Games, Best to Worst. Kotaku. Retrieved 15 July 2018.
 Data Tracker: How Does Final Fantasy XIII Compare?. Metacritic. Retrieved 15 July 2018.
 Final Fantasy XIV Online: A Realm Reborn. Metacritic. Retrieved 15 July 2018.
 Final Fantasy XV: Windows Edition. Metacritic. Retrieved 15 July 2018.
 Ranking the Final Fantasy Series. IGN. December 29, 2009. Archived from the original on August 6, 2011. Retrieved August 6, 2011.
 Final Fantasy Explorers Handbook instruction manual. Square. 1989. p. 75.
 Vestal, Andrew November 2, 1998. The History of Console RPGs. GameSpot. Archived from the original on February 6, 2009. Retrieved August 6, 2011.
 Jeremy Dunham July 26, 2007. Final Fantasy II Review. IGN. Archived from the original on August 6, 2011. Retrieved August 6, 2011.
 Patrick Gann. Romancing SaGa. RPGFan. Archived from the original on August 6, 2011. Retrieved August 6, 2011.
 Francesca Reyes November 4, 1999. Grandia. IGN. Archived from the original on August 6, 2011. Retrieved August 6, 2011.
 Final Fantasy III. Na.squareenix.com. Archived from the original on June 27, 2009. Retrieved August 6, 2011.
 Kasavin, Greg December 12, 2005. Final Fantasy IV Advance Review. GameSpot. Archived from the original on August 6, 2011. Retrieved August 6, 2011.
 Kraus, Alex August 30, 2006. Dirge of Cerberus defies expectations, for better and worse. USA Today. Archived from the original on August 6, 2011. Retrieved August 6, 2011.
 Record Breaking Games: RolePlaying Games. Guinness World Records 2009 Gamers Edition. Guinness World Records. Guinness. February 3, 2009. pp. 174175. ISBN 9781904994459.
 Craig, Timothy J. 2000. Japan Pop!: Inside the World of Japanese Popular Culture. M.E. Sharpe. p. 140. ISBN 0765605619.
 Kuchera, Ben May 23, 2006. Robot Chicken pokes fun at Final Fantasy. Ars Technica. Archived from the original on August 6, 2011. Retrieved August 6, 2011.
 Adventure Log. VG Cats. Archived from the original on April 18, 2009. Retrieved August 6, 2011.
 Final Fantasy Retrospective Part III. GameTrailers. July 30, 2007. Archived from the original on June 9, 2009. Retrieved August 6, 2011.
 Nobuo Uematsus Profile. Square Enix. Archived from the original on August 6, 2011. Retrieved August 6, 2011.
 The Black MagesDarkness and Starlight in Japanese. Dog Ear Records. Archived from the original on August 6, 2011. Retrieved August 6, 2011.
 Final Fantasy X Ultimania Guide. IGN. August 20, 2001. Archived from the original on August 6, 2011. Retrieved August 6, 2011.
 Square Enix Game Books Online in Japanese. Square Enix. Archived from the original on August 6, 2011. Retrieved August 6, 2011.
External links
Wikiquote has quotations related to: Final Fantasy
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Final Fantasy.
Official website in Japanese
Final Fantasy Games at Curlie
IGN Presents the History of Final Fantasy
vte
Final Fantasy series
Main games
Final FantasyFinal Fantasy IIFinal Fantasy III
Music
Music
Music
Final Fantasy IVFinal Fantasy VFinal Fantasy VI
Characters Music Remake The After Years The Complete Collection Chronicles
Music
Characters Kefka Terra Music
Final Fantasy VII RemakeFinal Fantasy VIIIFinal Fantasy IX
Characters Aerith Barret Cloud Sephiroth Tifa Vincent Yuffie Zack Music Compilation
Characters Squall Music
Characters Music
Final Fantasy XFinal Fantasy XIFinal Fantasy XII
Spira Characters Tidus Yuna Music X2 Music HD Remaster
Music
Characters Vaan Balthier Music Revenant Wings
Final Fantasy XIIIFinal Fantasy XIVFinal Fantasy XV
Characters Lightning Music XIII2 Music Lightning Returns Music
Music Original version Heavensward
Development Pocket Edition Characters Noctis Music
Other games
Airborne Brigade All the Bravest Artniks Brave Exvius Dimensions II Explorers Mobius Mystic Quest Record Keeper The 4 Heroes of Light World
Subseries
Crystal Chronicles Dissidia Fabula Nova Crystallis Ivalice Theatrhythm Curtain Call Dragon Quest
Related games
Bravely Default Second: End Layer Ehrgeiz Super Smash Bros. for Nintendo 3DS and Wii U Super Smash Bros. Ultimate Tekken 7
Related series
Chocobo Fortune Street Kingdom Hearts Mana SaGa
Films and animation
Legend of the Crystals The Spirits Within Unlimited Last Order Advent Children Brotherhood Kingsglaive
Media video games Recurring elements Music concerts
vte
Square Enix video game franchises
Square Enix
7th Saga ActRaiser All Star ProWrestling Bravely Bushido Blade Bust a Groove Chaos Rings Chocobo Chrono Death Trap Dragon Quest Drakengard E. V. O. Final Fantasy Fortune Street Front Mission Hanjuku Hero Kingdom Hearts Lord of Vermilion Mana Million Arthur Musashi Ogre Parasite Eve Rad Racer SaGa Schoolgirl Strikers Slime Star Ocean Tobal Valkyrie Profile Wonder Project WorldRunner
Square Enix Europe
Battlestations Championship Manager Conflict Deus Ex Dungeon Siege Eclipse Fear Effect Fighting Force Gangsters Gex Heimdall Just Cause Kane  Lynch Legacy of Kain Life Is Strange Mini Ninjas Pandemonium Shellshock Supreme Commander SWIV Thief Thunderhawk Tomb Raider Urban Chaos
Taito
Arkanoid Battle Gear Birdie King Bubble Bobble Puzzle Bobble Rainbow Islands Chaos Heat Chase Cleopatra Fortune Darius Densha de Go! Don Doko Don Elevator Action Exit Gunslinger Stratos Halley Hat Trick Hero Legend of Kage KiKi KaiKai Lufia Ninja Warriors Operation Power Blade Psychic Force Qix Rakugaki koku Rastan Ray Sonic Blast Man Space Invaders Groove Coaster Speed Race Violence Fight
vte
Visual Works
Feature films
Final Fantasy VII: Advent Children Kingsglaive: Final Fantasy XV
Video game franchises
Deus Ex Dragon Quest Drakengard Final Fantasy Gunslinger Stratos Hitman Kingdom Hearts Parasite Eve Tomb Raider
Standalone video games
The Bouncer Chrono Cross Densha de Go! Thief Vagrant Story Xenogears
Categories: Final FantasyVideo game franchises introduced in 1987Japanese brands

This is a featured article. Click here for more information.
Final Fantasy VII
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
Final Fantasy VII
A blondhaired man in black clothing and armor stands with a giant sword on his back. In the foreground is a futuristic building shown in monochrome. A logo illustration, showing the games title and a bluegreen stylized depiction of a falling meteorite, is displayed in the top right hand corner.
North American cover art, featuring the games protagonist, Cloud Strife
DevelopersSquare
Publishers
PlayStation
JP: Square
WW: Sony Computer Entertainment
Microsoft Windows
Eidos Interactive
DirectorsYoshinori Kitase
ProducersHironobu Sakaguchi
ProgrammersKen Narita
Artists
Yusuke Naora
Tetsuya Nomura
Writers
Kazushige Nojima
Yoshinori Kitase
ComposersNobuo Uematsu
SeriesFinal Fantasy
PlatformsPlayStation, Microsoft Windows, iOS, PlayStation 4, Android, Nintendo Switch, Xbox One
Release
January 31, 1997show
GenresRoleplaying
ModesSingleplayer
Final Fantasy VIIa is a 1997 roleplaying video game developed by Square for the PlayStation console. It is the seventh main installment in the Final Fantasy series. Published in Japan by Square, it was released in other regions by Sony Computer Entertainment, and became the first in the main series to see a PAL release. The games story follows Cloud Strife, a mercenary who joins an ecoterrorist organization to stop a worldcontrolling megacorporation from using the planets life essence as an energy source. Events send Cloud and his allies in pursuit of Sephiroth, a superhuman intent on destroying their planet. During the journey, Cloud builds close friendships with his party members, including Aerith Gainsborough, who holds the secret to saving their world.

Development began in 1994, originally for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System. After delays and technical difficulties from experimenting on several platforms, Square moved production to the PlayStation, largely due to the advantages of the CDROM format. Veteran Final Fantasy staff returned, including series creator and producer Hironobu Sakaguchi, director Yoshinori Kitase, and composer Nobuo Uematsu. The title became the first in the series to use full motion video and 3D computer graphics, which featured 3D character models superimposed over 2D prerendered backgrounds. Although the gameplay systems remained mostly unchanged from previous entries, Final Fantasy VII introduced more widespread science fiction elements and a more realistic presentation. The game had a staff of over 100, with a combined development and marketing budget of around US80 million.

Assisted by a large promotional campaign, Final Fantasy VII received widespread commercial and critical success, and remains widely regarded as a landmark title and one of the greatest games of all time. The title won numerous Game of the Year awards, and was acknowledged for boosting the sales of the PlayStation and popularizing Japanese roleplaying games worldwide. Critics praised its graphics, gameplay, music, and story, although some criticism was directed towards its English localization. Its success has led to enhanced ports on various platforms, a multimedia subseries called the Compilation of Final Fantasy VII, and an upcoming highdefinition remake for the PlayStation 4.


Contents
1Gameplay
2Synopsis
2.1Setting and characters
2.2Plot
3Development
3.1Art design
3.2Scenario
3.3Graphics
3.4Music
4Release
4.1PC version
4.2Localization
4.3Later releases
5Reception
5.1Initial reception and sales
5.2Awards and accolades
6Legacy
6.1Related media and merchandise
6.2Remake
7Notes
8References
9External links
Gameplay
See also: Recurring elements in the Final Fantasy series  Gameplay
The gameplay of Final Fantasy VII is mostly comparable to earlier Final Fantasy titles and Japanese roleplaying games.1 The game features three modes of play: the world map, the field, and the battle screen.23:15,20 At its grandest scale, players explore the entire world of Final Fantasy VII on a 3D world map.4 The world map is littered with representations of areas for the player to enter, including towns, environments, and ruins.5 Natural barrierssuch as mountains, deserts, and bodies of waterblock access by foot to some areas; as the game progresses, the player receives vehicles that help traverse these obstacles.3:44 Chocobos can be found in certain spots on the map, and if caught, can be ridden to areas inaccessible by foot or vehicle.3:46 In field mode, the player navigates fully scaled versions of the areas represented on the world map.4 For the first time in the series, this mode is represented in threedimensional space. The player can explore the environment, talk with characters, advance the story, and initiate event games in this mode.3:15 Event games are short minigames that use special control functions and are often tied into the story.3:18 While in field mode, the player may also find shops and inns. Shops provide an opportunity to buy and sell items that can aid Cloud and his party, such as weapons, armor, and accessories. If the characters rest at an inn, their hit points and mana points will be restored, along with any abnormalities contracted during battles.3:17

In a cavern, three people face a dragon. Along the bottom is a blue display showing each characters health, magic energy, and waiting time before their turn in battle.
A battle scene with Cloud, Barret, and Tifa facing a dragon. In this given moment, the player must choose a command for Cloud to perform.
At random intervals on the world map and in field mode, and at specific moments in the story, the game will enter the battle screen. This screen places the player characters on one side, the enemies on the other, and employs an Active Time Battle ATB system in which the characters exchange moves until one side is defeated.21 The damage or healing dealt by either side is quantified on screen. Characters have many statistics that determine their effectiveness in battle; for example, hit points determine how much damage they can take, and magic determines how much damage they can inflict with spells. Each character on the screen has a time gauge; when a characters gauge is full, the player can input a command for that character. The commands change as the game progresses, and are dependent on the characters in the players party and their equipment. Commands may include attacking with a weapon, casting magic, using items, summoning monsters, and other actions that either damage the enemy or aid the player characters. Final Fantasy VII also features powerful, characterspecific commands called Limit Breaks, which can be used only after a special gauge is charged by enemy attacks. After being attacked, characters may be afflicted by one or more abnormal statuses, such as poison or paralysis. These statuses and their adverse effects can be removed by special items or abilities. When all the enemies are defeated, the battle ends and the player may be rewarded with money, items, and experience points. If the player is defeated, it is game over and the game must be loaded to the last save point.3:2027

When not in battle, the player can use the menu screen. On this screen, the player can review each characters status and statistics, use items and abilities, change equipment, save the game when on the world map or at a save point, and manage orbs called Materia. The main method of customizing characters in Final Fantasy VII, Materia may be added to equipment to provide characters with new magic spells, monsters to summon, commands, statistical upgrades, and other benefits.6 Materia level up with their own experience point system, and can be combined to create different effects.3:3042

Synopsis
Setting and characters
Main article: Characters of the Final Fantasy VII series
Final Fantasy VII takes place on a world referred to ingame as the Planet, though it has been retroactively named Gaia.78 The planets lifeforce, called the Lifestream, is a flow of spiritual energy that gives life to everything on the Planet. Its processed form is known as Mako.9 On a societal and technological level, the game has been defined as an industrial or postindustrial science fiction milieu.10 During Final Fantasy VII, the Planets Lifestream is being drained for energy by the Shinra Electric Power Company, a worlddominating megacorporation headquartered in the city of Midgar. Shinras actions are weakening the Planet, threatening its existence and all life.11 Significant factions within the game include AVALANCHE, an ecoterrorist group seeking Shinras downfall so the Planet can recover;8 the Turks, a covert branch of Shinras security forces;12 SOLDIER, an elite Shinra fighting force created by enhancing humans with Mako;13 and the Cetra, a nearextinct human tribe which maintains a strong connection to the Planet and the Lifestream.14

The central protagonist is Cloud Strife, an unsociable mercenary who claims to be a former 1st Class SOLDIER. Early on, he works with two members of AVALANCHE: Barret Wallace, its brazen but fatherly leader; and Tifa Lockhart, a shy yet nurturing martial artist and childhood friend of Cloud. On their journey, they meet Aerith Gainsborough, a carefree flower merchant and one of the last surviving Cetra;1415 Red XIII, an intelligent quadruped from a tribe that protects the planet;16 Cait Sith, a fortunetelling robotic cat controlled by repentant Shinra staff member Reeve;317 and Cid Highwind, a pilot whose dream of being the first human in outer space was not realized.18 The group can also recruit Yuffie Kisaragi, a young ninja and skilled Materia thief; and Vincent Valentine, a former Turk and victim of Shinra experiments.19 The games main antagonists are Rufus Shinra, son of President Shinra and later leader of the Shinra Corporation;20 Sephiroth, a former SOLDIER who reappears several years after he was thought dead;3 and Jenova, a hostile extraterrestrial lifeform imprisoned by the Cetra 2000 years before.212223 A key character in Clouds backstory is Zack Fair, a member of SOLDIER and Aeriths first love.24

Plot
AVALANCHE destroys a Shinra Mako reactor in Midgar; an attack on another reactor goes wrong, and Cloud falls into the city slums. There, he meets Aerith and protects her from Shinra.2526 Meanwhile, Shinra finds AVALANCHE and collapses part of the upper city, killing most of AVALANCHE along with the slum population below.27 Aerith is also captured; as a Cetra, she can potentially reveal the Promised Land, which Shinra believes is overflowing with exploitable Lifestream energy.2829 Cloud, Barret and Tifa rescue Aerith; during their escape from Midgar, they discover that President Shinra was murdered by Sephiroth, who was presumed dead five years earlier.30 The party pursue Sephiroth across the Planet, with nowPresident Rufus on their trail; they are soon joined by the rest of the playable characters.

At a Cetra temple, Sephiroth reveals his intentions to use the Black Materia to summon Meteor, a spell that will hit the Planet with a devastating impact. Sephiroth will absorb the Lifestream as it attempts to heal the wound, becoming a godlike being.31 The party retrieves the Black Materia, but Sephiroth manipulates Cloud into surrendering it. Aerith departs alone to stop Sephiroth, following him to an abandoned Cetra city. During her prayer to the Planet for help, Sephiroth attempts to force Cloud to kill her; failing, he kills her himself before fleeing and leaving the Black Materia behind.32 The party then learns of Jenova, a hostile alien lifeform whose remains were unearthed by Shinra scientists decades earlier; at Nibelheim, Jenovas cells were used to create Sephiroth.2132 Five years before the game, Sephiroth and Cloud visited Nibelheim, where Sephiroth learned of his origins. Driven insane by this, he murdered the townspeople, then vanished when confronted by Cloud.

At the Northern Crater, the party learns that the Sephiroths they have encountered are Jenova clones created by the insane Shinra scientist Hojo. Confronting the real Sephiroth as he is killing his clones to reunite Jenovas cells, Cloud is again manipulated into delivering the Black Materia. Sephiroth then taunts Cloud by showing another SOLDIER in Clouds place in his memories of Nibelheim, suggesting that Cloud is a failed Sephiroth clone.33 Sephiroth summons Meteor and seals the Crater; Cloud falls into the Lifestream and the party is captured by Rufus.

Escaping Shinra, the party discovers Cloud at an island hospital in a catatonic state from Mako poisoning; Tifa stays as his caretaker. When the island is attacked by a planetary defense force called Weapon, the two fall into the Lifestream,34 where Tifa helps Cloud reconstruct his memories. Cloud was a mere infantryman who was never accepted into SOLDIER; the SOLDIER in his memories was his friend Zack. At Nibelheim, Cloud surprised and wounded Sephiroth after the latters mental breakdown, but Jenova preserved Sephiroths life. Hojo experimented on Cloud and Zack for four years, injecting them with Jenovas cells and Mako; they escaped, but Zack was eventually killed. The combined trauma of these events triggered an identity crisis in Cloud; he constructed a false persona around Zacks stories and his own fantasies.3235 Cloud accepts his past and reunites with the party, who learn that Aeriths prayer to the Planet had been successful: the Planet had attempted to summon Holy to prevent Meteors impact, but Sephiroth blocked Holy.

Shinra fails to destroy Meteor but manages to defeat a Weapon and puncture the Northern Crater, costing the lives of Rufus and other personnel. After killing Hojo, who is revealed to be Sephiroths biological father,21 the party descends to the Planets core through the opening in the Northern Crater and defeats both Jenova and Sephiroth. The party escapes and Holy is summoned, which destroys Meteor with the help of the Lifestream.36 Five hundred years later, Red XIII is seen with two cubs looking out over the ruins of Midgar, which are now covered in greenery, showing the planet has healed.

Development
A 43yearold Japanese man with necklength black haired, speaking into a microphone and facing slightly to the cameras right.
A 42yearold Japanese man with trimmed black hair, smiling directly at the camera.
Producer Hironobu Sakaguchi and director Yoshinori Kitase, who together helped create the story and gameplay concepts for Final Fantasy VII.
Initial concept talks for Final Fantasy VII began in 1994 at Final Fantasy developer Square, following the completion of Final Fantasy VI. As with the previous installment, series creator Hironobu Sakaguchi reduced his role to producer and granted others a more active role in development: these included Yoshinori Kitase, one of the directors of Final Fantasy VI. The next installment was planned as a 2D game for Nintendos Super Nintendo Entertainment System Super NES. After creating an early 2D prototype of it, the team postponed development to help finish Chrono Trigger.37 Once Chrono Trigger was completed, the team resumed discussions for Final Fantasy VII in 1995.3738

The team discussed continuing the 2D strategy, which would have been the safe and immediate path just prior to the imminent industry shift toward 3D gaming; such a change would require radical new development models.37 The team decided to take the riskier option and make a 3D game on new generation hardware, but had yet to choose between the cartridgebased Nintendo 64 or the CDROMbased PlayStation from Sony Computer Entertainment.37 The team also considered the Sega Saturn console and Microsoft Windows.39 Their decision was influenced by two factors: a highly successful tech demo based on Final Fantasy VI using the new Softimage 3D software, and the escalating price of cartridgebased games, which was limiting Squares audience.374041 Tests were made for a Nintendo 64 version, which would use the planned 64DD peripheral despite the lack of 64DD development kits and the prototype devices changing hardware specifications. This version was discarded during early testing, as the 2000 polygons needed to render the Behemoth monster placed excessive strain on the Nintendo 64 hardware, causing a low frame rate.37 It would have required an estimated thirty 64DD discs to run Final Fantasy VII properly with the data compression methods of the day.42 Faced with both technical and economic issues on Nintendos current hardware, and impressed by the increased storage capacity of CDROM when compared to the Nintendo 64 cartridge, Square shifted development of Final Fantasy VII, and all other planned projects, onto the PlayStation.37

In contrast to the visuals and audio, the overall gameplay system remained mostly unchanged from Final Fantasy V and VI, but with an emphasis on player control.43 The initial decision was for battles to feature shifting camera angles. Battle arenas had a lower polygon count than field areas, which made creating distinctive features more difficult.40 The summon sequences benefited strongly from the switch to the cinematic style, as the team had struggled to portray their scale using 2D graphics.44 In his role as producer, Sakaguchi placed much of his effort into developing the battle system.24 He proposed the Materia system as a way to provide more character customization than previous Final Fantasy games: battles no longer revolved around characters with innate skills and roles in battle, as Materia could be reconfigured between battles.40 Nomura also contributed to the gameplay; he designed the Limit Break system as an evolution of the Desperation Attacks used in Final Fantasy VI. The Limit Breaks served a purpose in gameplay while also evoking each characters personality in battle.2440

Square retained the passionbased game development approach from their earlier projects, but now had the resources and ambition to create the game they wanted. This was because they had extensive capital from their earlier commercial successes, which meant they could focus on quality and scale rather than obsessing over and working around their budget.37 Final Fantasy VII was at the time one of the most expensive video game projects ever, costing an estimated US40 million, which adjusted for inflation came to 61 million in 2017.374546 Development of the final version took a staff of between 100 and 150 people just over a year to complete. As video game development teams were usually only 20 people, the game had what was described as the largest development team of any game up to that point.3744 The development team was split between both Squares Japanese offices and its new American office in Los Angeles; the American team worked primarily on city backgrounds.42

Art design
Nine people stand in a group against a white background; the group made up of seven humans and two animallike beings wear a variety of clothing and the human characters carry different weapons.
Promotional artwork of the main cast. All main characters were designed by Tetsuya Nomura; Final Fantasy VII was his first role as character designer.3724
The games art director was Yusuke Naora, who had worked as a designer for Final Fantasy VI. With the switch into 3D, Naora realized that he needed to relearn drawing, as 3D visuals require a very different approach than 2D. With the massive scale and scope of the project, Naora was granted a team devoted entirely to the games visual design. The departments duties included illustration, modeling of 3D characters, texturing, creation of environments, visual effects, and animation.47 Naora later defined the art style of Final Fantasy VII as dark and weird.48 The Shinra logo, which incorporated a kanji symbol, was drawn by Naora personally.49 Promotional artwork, in addition to the logo artwork, was created by Yoshitaka Amano, an artist whose association with the series went back to its inception.50 While he had taken a prominent role in earlier entries, Amano was unable to do so for Final Fantasy VII, due to commitments at overseas exhibitions.850 His logo artwork was based on Meteor: when he saw images of Meteor, he was not sure how to turn it into suitable artwork. In the end, he created multiple variations of the image, and asked staff to choose which they preferred.51 The green coloring represents the predominant lighting in Midgar and the color of the Lifestream, while the blue reflected the ecological themes present in the story. Its coloring directly influenced the general coloring of the games environments.47

Another prominent artist was Tetsuya Nomura. Having impressed Sakaguchi with his proposed ideas, which were handwritten and illustrated rather than simply typed on a PC, Nomura was brought on as main character designer.24 Nomura stated that when he was brought on, the main scenario had not been completed, but he went along like, I guess first off you need a hero and a heroine, and from there drew the designs while thinking up details about the characters. After hed done the hero and heroine, he carried on drawing by thinking what kind of characters would be interesting to have. When he handed over the designs hed tell people the character details hed thought up, or write them down on a separate sheet of paper.52 Something that could not be carried over from earlier titles was the chibi sprite art, as that would not fit with the new graphical direction. Naora, in his role as an assistant character designer and art director, helped adjust each characters appearance so the actions they performed were believable. When designing Cloud and Sephiroth, Nomura was influenced by his view of their rivalry mirroring the legendary animosity between Miyamoto Musashi and Sasaki Kojir, with Cloud and Sephiroth being Musashi and Kojir respectively. Sephiroths look was defined as kakkoii, a Japanese term combining good looks with coolness.40 Several of Nomuras designs evolved substantially during development. Clouds original design of slickedback black hair with no spikes was intended to save polygons and contrast with Sephiroths long, flowing silver hair. However, Nomura feared that such masculinity could prove unpopular with fans, so he redesigned Cloud to feature a shock of spiky, bright blond hair. Vincents occupation changed from researcher to detective to chemist, and finally to a former Turk with a tragic past.824

Scenario
Sakaguchi was responsible for writing the initial plot, which was substantially different from the final version.53 In this draft for the planned SNES version, the games setting was envisioned as New York City in 1999. Similar to the final story, the main characters were part of an organization trying to destroy Mako reactors, but they were pursued by a hotblooded detective named Joe. The main characters would eventually blow up the city. An early version of the Lifestream concept was present at this stage.375341 According to Sakaguchi, his mother had died while Final Fantasy VI was being developed, and choosing life as a theme helped him cope with her passing in a rational and analytical manner.44 Square eventually used the New York setting in Parasite Eve 1998.41 While the planned concept was dropped, Final Fantasy VII still marked a drastic shift in setting from previous entries, dropping the Medieval fantasy elements in favor of a world that was ambiguously futuristic.54

In an underground environment on top of an ancient alter, a silverhaired man in black clothing has just used his long sword to stab a brownhaired woman in red clothing through the chest, and now withdraws it.
The cutscene of Sephiroth killing Aerith Gainsborough. This key story sequence has been called one of the most shocking,55 cinematic,56 and genredefining57 moments in video games.
When Kitase was put in charge of Final Fantasy VII, he and Nomura reworked the entire initial plot. Scenario writer Kazushige Nojima joined the team after finishing work on Bahamut Lagoon.24 While Final Fantasy VI featured an ensemble cast of numerous playable characters that were equally important, the team soon decided to develop a central protagonist for Final Fantasy VII.40 The pursuit of Sephiroth that comprised most of the main narrative was suggested by Nomura, as nothing similar had been done in the series before.24 Kitase and Nojima conceived AVALANCHE and Shinra as opposing organizations, and created Clouds backstory as well as his relationship to Sephiroth.53 Among Nojimas biggest contributions to the plot were Clouds memories and split personality; this included the eventual conclusion involving his newly created character of Zack.24 The crew helped Kitase adjust the specifics of Sakaguchis original Lifestream concept.53

Regarding the overall theme of the game, Sakaguchi said it was not enough to make life the theme, you need to depict living and dying. In any event, you need to portray death.58 Consequently, Nomura proposed killing off the heroine.2458 Aerith had been the only heroine, but the death of a female protagonist would necessitate a second; this led to the creation of Tifa.59 The developers decided to kill Aerith, as her death would be the most devastating and consequential.2458 Kitase wanted to depict it as very sudden and unexpected, leaving not a dramatic feeling but great emptiness, feelings of reality and not Hollywood.38 The script for the scene was written by Nojima. Kitase and Nojima then planned that most of the main cast would die shortly before the final battle; Nomura vetoed the idea because he felt it would undermine the impact of Aeriths death.37 Several character relations and statuses underwent changes during development. Aerith was to be Sephiroths sister, which influenced the design of her hair. The team then made Sephiroth a previous love interest of hers to deepen her backstory, but later swapped him with Zack.5260 Vincent and Yuffie were to be part of the main narrative, but due to time constraints, they were nearly cut and eventually relegated to being optional characters.52

Nojima was charged with writing the scenario and unifying the teams ideas into a cohesive narrative, as Kitase was impressed with his earlier work on the mysterylike Heracles no Eik III: Kamigami no Chinmoku, an entry in the Glory of Heracles series.24 To make the characters more realistic, Nojima wrote scenes in which they would occasionally argue and raise objections: while this inevitably slowed down the pace of the story, it added depth to the characters. The graphical improvements allowed even relatively bland lines of dialogue to be enhanced with reactions and poses from the 3D character models.44 Voice acting would have led to significant load times, so it was omitted.61 Masato Kato wrote several lategame scenes, including the Lifestream sequence and Cloud and Tifas conversation before the final battle. Initially unaffiliated with the project, Kato was called on to help flesh out less important story scenes. He wrote his scenes to his own tastes without outside consultation, something he later regretted.62

Graphics
With the shift from the SNES to the next generation consoles, Final Fantasy VII became the first project in the series to use 3D computer graphics.38 Developers initially considered overlaying 2D sprites on 3D backgrounds, but decided to forgo pixel art entirely in favor of polygonal models.63 Aside from the story, Final Fantasy VI had many details undecided when development began; most design elements were hashed out along the way. In contrast, with Final Fantasy VII, the developers knew from the outset it was going to be a real 3D game, so from the earliest planning stage detailed designs were in existence. The script was also finalized, and the image for the graphics had been fleshed out. This meant that when actual development work began, storyboards for the game were already in place.40 The shift from cartridge ROM to CDROM posed some problems: according to lead programmer Ken Narita, the CDROM had a slower access speed, delaying some actions during the game, so the team needed to overcome this issue.44 Certain tricks were used to conceal load times, such as offering animations to keep players from getting bored.38 When it was decided to use 3D graphics, there was discussion among the staff whether to use spritebased character models or 3D polygonal models. While sprites proved more popular with the staff, the polygon models were chosen as they could better express emotion. This decision was influenced by the teams exposure to the 3D character models used in Alone in the Dark. Sakaguchi decided to use deformed models for field navigation and realtime event scenes, for better expression of emotion, while realistically proportioned models would be used in battles.60 The team purchased Silicon Graphics Onyx supercomputers and related workstations, and accompanying software including Softimage 3D, PowerAnimator, and NWorld for an estimated total of 21 million. Many team members had never seen the technology before.37

An internal industrial environment, with metal walls, girders and pipework dominating the scenea track is visible far below, and steam escapes rhythmically from two points within the area.
The prerendered backgrounds, such as this scene in Midgar, provided the developers with a choice of camera angle, giving a more cinematic experience.
The transition from 2D graphics to 3D environments overlaid on prerendered backgrounds was accompanied by a focus on a more realistic presentation.38 In previous entries, the sizes for characters and environments were fixed, and the player saw things from a scrolling perspective. This changed with Final Fantasy VII; environments shifted with camera angles, and character model sizes shifted depending on both their place in the environment and their distance from the camera, giving a sense of scale.4044 The choice of this highly cinematic style of storytelling, contrasting directly with Squares previous games, was attributed to Kitase, who was a fan of films and had an interest in the parallels between film and video game narrative.37 Character movement during ingame events was done by the character designers in the planning group. While designers normally cooperate with a motion specialist for such animations, the designers taught themselves motion work, resulting in each characters movements differing depending on their creatorssome designers liked exaggerated movements, while others went for subtlety. Much of the time was spent on each characters daytoday, routine animations. Motion specialists were brought in for the games battle animations. The first characters the team worked with were Cloud and Barret.40 Some of the realtime effects, such as an explosion near the opening, were handdrawn rather than computer animated.47

The main creative force behind the overall 3D presentation was Kazuyuki Hashimoto, the general supervisor for these sequences. Being experienced in the new technology the team had brought on board, he accepted the post at Square as the team aligned with his own creative spirit. One of the major events in development was when the realtime graphics were synchronized to computergenerated full motion video FMV cutscenes for some story sequences, notably an early sequence where a realtime model of Cloud jumps onto an FMVrendered moving train.37 The backgrounds were created by overlaying two 2D graphic layers and changing the motion speed of each to simulate depth perception. While this was not a new technique, the increased power of the PlayStation enabled a more elaborate version of this effect.44 The biggest issue with the 3D graphics was the large memory storage gap between the development hardware and the console: while the early 3D tech demo had been developed on a machine with over 400 megabytes of total memory, the PlayStation only had two megabytes of system memory and 500 kilobytes for texture memory. The team needed to figure out how to shrink the amount of data while preserving the desired effects. This was aided with reluctant help from Sony, who had hoped to keep Squares direct involvement limited to a standard API package, but they eventually relented and allowed the team direct access to the hardware specifications.37

Final Fantasy VII features two types of cutscenes: realtime cutscenes featuring polygon models on prerendered backgrounds, and FMV cutscenes.44 The games computergenerated imagery CGI FMVs were produced by Visual Works, a thennew subsidiary of Square that specialized in computer graphics and FMVs creation. Visual Works had created the initial movie concept for a 3D game project.8 The FMVs were created by an international team, covering both Japan and North America and involving talent from the gaming and film industry; Western contributors included artists and staff who had worked on the Star Wars film series, Jurassic Park, Terminator 2: Judgment Day, and True Lies.64 The team tried to create additional optional CGI content which would bring optional characters Vincent and Yuffie into the ending. As this would have further increased the number of discs the game needed, the idea was discarded.65 Kazuyuki Ikumori, a future key figure at Visual Works, helped with the creation of the CGI cutscenes, in addition to general background design.66 The CGI FMV sequences total around 40 minutes of footage, something only possible with the PlayStations extra memory space and graphical power. This innovation brought with it the added difficulty of ensuring that the inferiority of the ingame graphics in comparison to the FMV sequences was not too obvious. Kitase has described the process of making the ingame environments as detailed as possible to be a daunting task.38

Music
Main article: Music of the Final Fantasy VII series
A 46yearold Japanese man smiling directly into the camera. He has black hair going to gray around the temples and a graying mustache.
Nobuo Uematsu composed, arranged, and produced the entire soundtrack for Final Fantasy VII

OneWinged Angel
MENU0:00
OneWinged Angel, the theme used during a part of the final battle against Sephiroth, is recognized by many as one of Uematsus best works. The track uses highquality digitized voices, a first for the series.
Problems playing this file? See media help.
The musical score of Final Fantasy VII was composed, arranged, and produced by Nobuo Uematsu, who had served as the sole composer for the six previous Final Fantasy games. Originally, Uematsu had planned to use CD quality music with vocal performances to take advantage of the consoles audio capabilities, but found that it resulted in the game having much longer loading times for each area. Uematsu then decided that the higher quality audio was not worth the tradeoff with performance, and opted instead to use MIDIlike sounds produced by the consoles internal sound sequencer, similar to how his soundtracks for the previous games in the series on the Super NES were implemented.6768 While the Super NES only had eight sound channels to work with, the PlayStation had twentyfour. Eight were reserved for sound effects, leaving sixteen available for the music.43 Uematsus approach to composing the games music was to treat it like a film soundtrack and compose music that reflected the mood of the scenes, rather than trying to make strong melodies to define the game, as he felt that approach would come across too strong when placed alongside the games new 3D visuals. As an example, he composed the track intended for the scene in the game where Aerith Gainsborough is killed to be sad but beautiful, rather than more overtly emotional, creating what he felt was a more understated feeling.37 Uematsu additionally said that the soundtrack had a feel of realism, which also prevented him from using exorbitant, crazy music.69

The first piece that Uematsu composed for the game was the opening theme; game director Yoshinori Kitase showed him the opening cinematic and asked him to begin the project there. The track was well received in the company, which gave Uematsu a sense that it was going to be a really good project. Final Fantasy VII was the first game in the series to include a track with highquality digitized vocals, OneWinged Angel, which accompanies a section of the final battle of the game. The track has been called Uematsus most recognizable contribution to the music of the Final Fantasy series, which Uematsu agrees with.3770 Inspired by The Rite of Spring by Igor Stravinsky to make a more classical track, and by rock and roll music from the late 1960s and early 1970s to make an orchestral track with a destructive impact, he spent two weeks composing short unconnected musical phrases, and then arranged them together into OneWinged Angel, an approach he had never used before.37

Music from the game has been released in several albums. Square released the main soundtrack album, Final Fantasy VII Original Soundtrack, on four Compact Discs through its DigiCube subsidiary in 1997. A limited edition release was also produced, containing illustrated liner notes.68 The regular edition of the album reached third on the Japan Oricon charts, while the limited edition reached 19.7172 Overall, the album had sold nearly 150,000 copies by January 2010.73 A singledisc album of selected tracks from the original soundtrack, along with three arranged pieces, titled Final Fantasy VII Reunion Tracks, was also released by DigiCube in 1997,74 reaching 20 on the Japan Oricon charts.75 A third album, Piano Collections Final Fantasy VII, was released by DigiCube in 2003, and contains one disc of piano arrangements of tracks from the game. It was arranged by Shir Hamaguchi and performed by Seiji Honda, and reached 228 on the Oricon charts.7677

Release
Final Fantasy VII was announced in February 1996.78 Square president and chief executive officer Tomoyuki Takechi was fairly confident about Japanese players making the game a commercial success despite it being on a new platform.37 A playable demo was included on a disc giveaway at the 1996 Tokyo Game Show, dubbed Squares Preview Extra: Final Fantasy VII  Siggraph 95 Works. The disc also included the early test footage Square created using characters from Final Fantasy VI.3779 The initial release date was at some point in 1996, but to properly realize their vision, Square postponed the release date almost a full year.54 Final Fantasy VII was released on January 31, 1997.80 It was published in Japan by Square.81 A rerelease of the game based on its Western version, titled Final Fantasy VII International, was released on October 2, 1997.82 This improved International version would kickstart the trend for Square to create an updated version for Japanese release, based on the enhanced Western versions.83 The International version was rereleased as a physical disc as part of the Final Fantasy 25th Anniversary Ultimate Box Japanese package on December 18, 2012.84

While its success in Japan had been taken for granted by Square executives, North America and Europe were another matter, as up to that time the Japanese roleplaying genre was still a niche market in Western territories. Sony, due to the PlayStations struggles against Nintendo and Segas home consoles, lobbied for the publishing rights in North America and Europe following Final Fantasy VIIs transfer to PlayStationto further persuade Square, Sony offered a lucrative royalties deal with profits potentially equaling those Square would get by selfpublishing the game. Square accepted Sonys offer as Square itself lacked Western publishing experience. Square was uncertain about the games success, as other JRPGs including Final Fantasy VI had met with poor sales outside Japan. To help with promoting the title overseas, Square dissolved their original Washington offices and hired new staff for fresh offices in Costa Mesa.37 It was first exhibited to the Western public at Electronic Entertainment Expo 1996 E3.85

To promote the game overseas, Square and Sony launched a widespread threemonth advertising campaign in August 1997. Beginning with a television commercial that ran alongside popular shows such as Saturday Night Live and The Simpsons by TBWAChiatDay, the campaign included numerous articles in both gaming and general interest magazines, advertisements in comics from publishers such as DC Comics and Marvel, a special collaboration with Pepsi, media events, sample discs, and merchandise.86 According to estimations by Takechi, the total worldwide marketing budget came to USD40 million; 10 million had been spent in Japan, 10 million in Europe, and 20 million in North America.37 Unlike its predecessors, Final Fantasy VII did not have its numeral adjusted to account for the lack of a Western release for Final Fantasy II, III and Vwhile only the fourth Final Fantasy released outside Japan, its Japanese title was retained.87 It released in North America on September 7, 1997.88 The game released in Europe on November 17, becoming the first Final Fantasy game to be released in Europe.8990 The Western version included additional elements and alterations, such as streamlining of the menu and Materia system, reducing the health of enemies, new visual cues to help with navigation across the worldmap, and additional cutscenes relating to Clouds past.8391

PC version
A version for PC was developed by Squares Costa Mesa offices. Square invested in a PC version to reach as wide a player base as possible; many Western consumers did not own a PlayStation, and Squares deal with Sony did not prohibit such a port. Having never released a title for PC, Square decided to treat the port as a sales experiment. The port was handled by a team of 15 to 20 people, mostly from Costa Mesa but with help from Tokyo.37 Square did not begin the port until the console version was finished.92 The team needed to rewrite an estimated 80 of the games code, due to the need to unify what had been a custom build for a console written by multiple staff members. Consequently, programmers faced problems such as having to unify the original PlayStation versions five different game engines, leading to delays.37 The PC version came with a license for Yamaha Corporations software synthesizer SYXG70, allowing highquality sequenced music despite varying sound hardware setups on different user computers. The conversion of the nearly 100 original musical pieces to XG format files was done by Yamaha.93

To maximize their chances of success, Square searched for a Western company to assist with releasing the PC version. Eidos Interactive, whose release of Tomb Raider had turned them into a publishing giant, agreed to market and publish the port.37 The port was announced in December 1997, along with Eidos exclusivity deal for North America and Europe at the time.94 To help the product stand out in stores, Eidos chose a triangular shape for the cover and box. They agreed on a contract price of 1.8 million, making initial sales forecasts of 100,000 units based on that outlay.37 The PC version was released in North America and Europe on June 25, 1998; the port was not released in Japan.93 Within one month, sales of the port exceeded the initial forecasts.37 The PC version would end up providing the source code for subsequent ports.37

Localization
See also: Localization of Square Enix video games
Localization of Final Fantasy VII was handled internally by Square. The English localization, led by Seth Luisi, was completed by a team of about fifty people and faced a variety of problems. According to Luisi, the biggest hurdle was making the direct JapanesetoEnglish text translation read correctly in English. The sentence structure and grammar rules for the Japanese language is very different from English, making it difficult for the translation to read like native English without distorting the meaning.95 Michael Basket was the sole translator for the project, though he received the help of native Japanese speakers from the Tokyo office. The localization was taxing for the team due to their inexperience, lack of professional editors, and poor communication between the North American and Japanese offices. A result of this disconnect was the original localization of Aeriths namewhich was intended as a conflation of air and earthas Aeris due to a lack of communication between localization staff and the QA team.96

The team also faced several technical issues, such as dealing with a fixed font size, and having to add symbols using language input keys so the code would function. Consequently, the text was still read as Japanese by the word processor; the computers spellcheck could not be used, and mistakes had to be caught manually. To complicate matters, the Japanese text used obscure kanji symbols carried over from Chinese writing. Swear words were used frequently in the localization to help convey the original Japanese meaning, though most profanities were censored in a manner described by Square employee Richard Honeywood as the old comic book !type replacement.8396 The European release was described as being in a worse condition, as the translations into multiple European languages were outsourced by Sony to another company, further hindering communication. For the PC port, Square attempted to fix translation and grammar mistakes for the North American and European versions, but did not have the time and budget to retranslate all the text.96 According to Honeywood, the success of Final Fantasy VII in the West encouraged Square to focus more on localization quality; on future games, Square hired additional translators and editors, while also streamlining communication between the development and localization teams.83

Some months prior to the games North American release, Sony publicly stated that it was considering cutting the scene at the Honey Bee Inn due to the salacious content, prompting numerous online petitions and letters of protest from RPG fans. Square subsequently stated that it would never allow Sony to localize the game in any way.97

Later releases
The International version of Final Fantasy VII was released on PlayStation Network PSN as a PSOne Classic in Japan on April 10, 2009. This version was compatible with both PlayStation 3 and PlayStation Portable with support for PlayStation Vita and PlayStation TV coming later.91 Final Fantasy VII was later released as a PSOne Classic in North America, Europe and Australia on June 2.98 The PC version was updated by DotEmu for use on modern operating systems and released via Square Enixs North American and European online stores on August 14, 2012.99100 It included high resolution support, cloud saves, achievements and a character booster. It would later be released via Steam on July 4, 2013,101102 replacing the version available on Square Enixs North American and European online stores.103104 The PC version would be released in Japan for the first time on May 16, 2013, exclusively via Square Enixs Japanese online store with the International version title. It has features unavailable in the western version including high speed mode, no random encounters mode and a max stats command.105 A release for iOS, based on the PC version and adjusted for mobile devices by D4 Enterprise, was released on August 19, 2015, with an autosave feature.106 After being announced at PlayStation Experience 2014, the PC version was released for PlayStation 4 on December 5, 2015. DotEmu developed the PS4 version.107108109110 A version for Android was released on July 7, 2016.111 A version for the PlayStation Classic will be released on December 3, 2018.112 A version for the Nintendo Switch and Xbox One will be released worldwide in 2018 or 2019.113

Reception
Initial reception and sales
Reception
Review scores
PublicationScore
iOSPCPS
1UP.comNANAA5
AllGameNA4.55 stars12055 stars2
CVGNA91012255 stars121
EdgeNANA910123
EGMNANA3840124
FamitsuNANA3840125
GameFanNANA300300126127
Game InformerNANA9.7510128
GameSpotNA8101299.5101
IGNNA8.2101309.5104
OPM USNANA55 stars131
PC Gamer USNA90133NA
PSMNANA55 stars132
CGMNA45 stars135NA
Gamezebo45 stars136NANA
Pocket Gamer810137NANA
RPGamerNANA810138 
1010139
TouchArcade45 stars140NANA
Aggregate scores
GameRankingsNA8611792116
Metacritic77100119NA92100118
Within three days of its release in Japan, Final Fantasy VII sold over two million copies.67141142 This popularity inspired thousands of retailers in North America to break street dates in September to meet public demand for the title.143 In the games debut weekend in North America, it sold 330,000 copies,144 and had reached sales of 500,000 copies in less than three weeks.145 The momentum established in the games opening weeks continued for several months; Sony announced the game had sold one million copies in North America by early December,146 prompting business analyst Edward Williams from Monness, Crespi, Hardt  Co. to comment, Sony redefined the roleplaying game RPG category and expanded the conventional audience with the launch of Final Fantasy VII.146 By the end of 2005, the game had sold over 9.8 million copies worldwide,147 making it the highestselling game in the Final Fantasy series.148 By the end of 2006, The Best, the bargain reissue of the game, had sold over 158,000 copies in Japan.149 Final Fantasy VII is credited as the game that sold the PlayStation, as well as allowing Japanese roleplaying games to find a place in markets outside Japan. By May 2010, it had sold over 10 million copies worldwide,150 making it the most popular title in the series in terms of units sold.151152153 The original PC version surpassed Eidos expectations: while initially forecast to sell 100,000 units, it quickly exceeded sales of one million units, garnering royalties of over 2 million for Square.37 As of August 2015, all physical and digital versions have sold over 11 million units worldwide.154

The game received widespread acclaim from critics upon release. It was referred to by GameFan as quite possibly the greatest game ever made, a quote selected for the back cover of the games jewel case.155 GameSpot commented that never before have technology, playability, and narrative combined as well as in Final Fantasy VII, expressing particular favor toward the games graphics, audio, and story.1 IGNs Jay Boor insisted the games graphics were light years beyond anything ever seen on the PlayStation, and regarded its battle system as its strongest point.4 Computer and Video Gamess Alex C praised the dramatic story and welldeveloped characters.122 Edge noted that Final Fantasy VII had come close to being an interactive movie in playable form, praising its combination of a complex story that went against Western graphic adventures trends and excellently orchestrated chip music.123 RPGamer praised the games soundtrack, both in variety and sheer volume, stating that Uematsu has done his work exceptionally well and saying that it was potentially his best work.138 Final Fantasy VII has received some negative criticism. Official U.S. PlayStation Magazine OPM and GameSpot questioned the games linear progression.1131 OPM considered the games translation a bit muddy and felt the summon animations were repetitive.131 RPGamer cited its translation as packed with typos and other errors which further obscure what is already a very confusing plot.156 GamePro also considered the JapanesetoEnglish translation a significant weakness in the game,157 and IGN regarded the ability to use only three characters at a time as the games only shortcoming.4

Reviewers gave similar praise to the PC version, but criticized its various technical faults.133134158 Computer Games Magazine said that no other recent game had the same tendency to fail to work in any capacity on multiple computers.135 Computer Gaming World complained that the music quality suffered on PC sound cards,134 and Next Generation Magazine found the games prerendered backgrounds significantly less impressive than those of the PlayStation version.158 However, the latter magazine found the higherresolution battle visuals absolutely stunning,158 and Computer Games Magazine said that they showed off the potential graphical power of PCs.135 All three magazines concluded by praising the game despite its technical flaws,134135158 and PC Gamer summarized that, while Square apparently did only what was required to get its PlayStation game running under Windows, Final Fantasy VII is still a winner on the PC.133

Awards and accolades
Final Fantasy VII was given numerous Game of the Year awards in 1997. It won in the Academy of Interactive Arts  Sciences first annual Interactive Achievement Awards in the categories Console Adventure Game of the Year and Console Role Playing Game of the Year it was also nominated in the categories Interactive Title of the Year, Outstanding Achievement in ArtGraphics and Outstanding Achievement in Interactive Design.159 In the Origins Award, it won in the category Best Roleplaying Computer Game of 1997.160 It was also awarded the Readers Choice All Systems Game of the Year, Readers Choice PlayStation Game of the Year and Readers Choice RolePlaying Game of the Year by EGM,161 which also gave it other awards for Hottest Video Game Babe for Tifa Lockheart, Most Hyper for a Game, Best Ending and Best Print Ad.162

Since 1997, it has been selected by many game magazines as one of the top video games of all time, listed as 91st in EGMs 2001 100 Best Games of All Time,163 and as fourth in Retro Gamers Top 100 Games in 2004.164 In 2018, it was ranked 99th in IGNs Top 100 Games of All Time165 and as third in PALGNs The Greatest 100 Games Ever.166 Final Fantasy VII was included in The Greatest Games of All Time list by GameSpot in 2006,55 and ranked as second in Empires 2006 100 Greatest Games of All Time,167 as third in Stuffs 100 Greatest Games in 2008168 and as 15th in Game Informers 2009 Top 200 Games of All Time down five places from its previous best games of all time list169.170 GameSpot placed it as the second most influential game ever made in 2002;171 in 2007, GamePro ranked it 14th on the list of the most important games of all time, and in 2009 it finished in the same place on their list of the most innovative games of all time.172173 In 2012, Time named it one of their AllTIME 100 Video Games.174 In March 2018, Game Informers Readers Choice Top 300 Games of All Time, Final Fantasy ranked in 7th place. 175 In March 2018, Gamesradar rated The 25 best PS1 games of all time, Final Fantasy VII was ranked in 12th place.176

It has also appeared in numerous other greatest game lists. In 2007, Dengeki PlayStation gave it the Best Story, Best RPG and Best Overall Game retrospective awards for games on the original PlayStation.177 GamePro named it the best RPG title of all time in 2008,178 and featured it in their 2010 article The 30 Best PSN Games.179 In 2012, GamesRadar also ranked it as the sixth saddest game ever.180 On the other hand, GameSpy ranked it seventh on their 2003 list of the most overrated games.181

Final Fantasy VII has often placed at or near the top of many reader polls of alltime best games. It was voted the Readers Choice Game of the Century in an IGN poll in 2000,182 and placed second in the Top 100 Favorite Games of All Time by Japanese magazine Famitsu in 2006 it was also voted as ninth in Famitsus 2011 poll of most tearinducing games of all time.183184 Users of GameFAQs voted it the Best Game Ever in 2004 and in 2005,185186 and placed it second in 2009.187 In 2008, readers of Dengeki magazine voted it the best game ever made,188 as well as the ninth most tearinducing game of all time.189

Legacy
An orchestra performs a concert in a musical theatre, featuring music from the video game; in front of a screen showing people dressed as characters from the game.
Music from the games soundtrack is often performed live in symphonic concerts, such as the Video Games Live event in 2009.
The game inspired an unofficial version for the NES by Chinese company Shenzhen Nanjing Technology. This port features the Final Fantasy VII game scaled back to 2D, with some of the side quests removed.190 The games popularity and openended nature also led director Kitase and scenario writer Nojima to establish a plotrelated connection between Final Fantasy VII and Final Fantasy X2. The character Shinra from Final Fantasy X2 proposes the concept of extracting the life energy from within the planet Spira. Nojima has stated that Shinra and his proposal are a deliberate nod to the Shinra Company, and that he envisioned the events of Final Fantasy X2 as a prequel to those in Final Fantasy VII.191 The advances in technology used to create the FMV sequences and computer graphics for Final Fantasy VII allowed Sakaguchi to begin production on the first Final Fantasy film, Final Fantasy: The Spirits Within.192 The game introduced a particular aesthetic to the seriesfantasy suffused with moderntoadvanced technologythat was explored further in Final Fantasy VIII, The Spirits Within, and Final Fantasy XV.193194195 Rereleases of Square games in Japan with bonus features would occur frequently after the release of Final Fantasy VII International. Later titles that would be rereleased as international versions include Final Fantasy X and other follow ups from the franchise,196197198 as well as the Kingdom Hearts series.199200

Several characters from Final Fantasy VII have made cameo appearances in other Square Enix titles, most notably the fighting game Ehrgeiz and the popular FinalFantasytoDisney crossover series Kingdom Hearts.201 Additionally, fighting video game Dissidia Final Fantasy includes Final Fantasy VII characters such as Cloud and Sephiroth, and allows players to fight with characters from throughout the Final Fantasy series, and its followup, Dissidia 012 Final Fantasy, included Tifa as well.202 Cloud is also a playable character in Final Fantasy Tactics.203 In 2015, Cloud was released as a downloadable content character for the Nintendo fighting game Super Smash Bros. for Nintendo 3DS and Wii U, along with a stage based on Midgar204 and is set to return in Super Smash Bros. Ultimate. Aeriths death in the game has often been referred as one of the most significant moments from any video game.555657

Related media and merchandise
Further information: Compilation of Final Fantasy VII
The world of Final Fantasy VII is explored further in the Compilation of Final Fantasy VII, a series of games, animated features, and short stories.205 The first title in the Compilation is the mobile game Before Crisis: Final Fantasy VII, a prequel focusing on the Turks activities six years before the original game.206 The CGI film sequel Final Fantasy VII: Advent Children, set two years after the game, was the first title announced but the second to be released. Special DVD editions of the film included Last Order: Final Fantasy VII, an original video animation that recounts the destruction of Nibelheim.207 Dirge of Cerberus: Final Fantasy VII and its mobile phone counterpart, Dirge of Cerberus Lost Episode: Final Fantasy VII, are thirdperson shooters208 set one year after Advent Children. Dirge focuses on the backstory of Vincent Valentine, whose history was left mostly untold in Final Fantasy VII. The most recent title is the PlayStation Portable game Crisis Core: Final Fantasy VII, an action roleplaying game that centers on Zacks past.209

Releases not under the Compilation label include Maiden Who Travels the Planet, which follows Aeriths journey in the Lifestream after her death, taking place concurrently with the second half of the original game.210 In 1998, the Official Final Fantasy VII Strategy Guide was licensed by Square Soft and published by Brady Games.211 Final Fantasy VII Snowboarding is a mobile port of the snowboard minigame featured in the original game,212 featuring different courses for the player to tackle.213 The game is downloadable on V Castcompatible mobile phones, and was first made available in 2005 in Japan and North America.214 In September 2009 Jason P. Blahuta, Michel S. Beaulieu Wiley created Final Fantasy and Physiology: The Ultimate Walkthrough. This eBook is a philosophical guide as to why and how players use certain characters in the Final Fantasy series, explains how gamers perception of a characters weapon and clothing designs can change how they use them. The writers inform the reader that this eBook will give them an indepth understanding of themselves and the game which will enhance their gaming experience. 215

Final Fantasy VII GBike is a mobile game released for iOS and Android in December 2014, based on the motorbike minigame featured in the original game.216 In September 2007, Square Enix published Final Fantasy VII 10th Anniversary Ultimania. This book is an indepth complication of FFVII storyline and artwork.217 The Universal Studios Theme Park in Japan is developing a Final Fantasy VII themed virtual reality attraction.218

Remake
Main article: Final Fantasy VII Remake
With the announcement and development of the Compilation of Final Fantasy VII, speculation spread that an enhanced remake of the original Final Fantasy VII would be released for the PlayStation 3. This conjecture was sparked at the 2005 E3 convention by the release of a video featuring the opening sequence of Final Fantasy VII recreated using the PlayStation 3s graphical capabilities.219 Throughout the lifespan of the PS3, SquareEnix stated that such a game was not in development. A high definition remake was eventually announced at E3 2015 for the PlayStation 4. The game will be more than a high definition remaster, with director Tetsuya Nomura stating that the game will have changes made to its story and combat system.220

Notes
 VII Fainaru Fantaj Sebun in Japanese
References
 Kasavin, Greg September 29, 1997. Final Fantasy VII Review. GameSpot. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on October 21, 2013. Retrieved January 21, 2017.
 Final Fantasy VII Greatest Hits. Allgame. Rovi Corporation. Archived from the original on January 2, 2010. Retrieved September 4, 2012.
 Square Co. Ltd. 1997. Final Fantasy VII North American instruction manual. Sony Computer Entertainment. SCUS94163.
 Boor, Jay September 3, 1997. Final Fantasy VII Review. IGN. News Corporation. Archived from the original on May 16, 2008. Retrieved July 16, 2008.
 1UP Staff January 1, 2000. Final Fantasy VII Review. 1UP.com. Archived from the original on June 10, 2016. Retrieved July 16, 2008.
 Final Fantasy VII: The Materia System. Electronic Gaming Monthly. No. 93. Ziff Davis. April 1997. p. 69.
 Interview: Kosei Ito QA in Japanese. ITmedia. 2004. Archived from the original on August 17, 2010. Retrieved December 16, 2014.
 McLaughlin, Rus April 30, 2008. IGN Presents: The History of Final Fantasy VII. IGN. Ziff Davis. Archived from the original on December 8, 2009. Retrieved September 14, 2008.
 Studio BentStuff, ed. 2005. Final Fantasy VII Ultimania  in Japanese. Square Enix. pp. 216217. ISBN 4757515200.
 Final Fantasy. Official U.S. PlayStation Magazine. Ziff Davis 47: 16. August 2001.
 FFVIIPS. Dengeki PlayStation in Japanese. ASCII Media Works 17: 1415. February 14, 1996.
 Dun, Teresa February 2008. Complete Final Fantasy VII Character Guide. PlayStation: The Official Magazine 60.
 Studio BentStuff, ed. 2005. Final Fantasy VII Ultimania  in Japanese. Square Enix. p. 217. ISBN 4757515200.
 Studio BentStuff, ed. 2005. Final Fantasy VII Ultimania  in Japanese. Square Enix. p. 59. ISBN 4757515200.
 Studio BentStuff, ed. 2005. Final Fantasy VII Ultimania  in Japanese. Square Enix. p. 30. ISBN 4757515200.
 SoftBank, ed. 2006. Final Fantasy VII Advent Children: Reunion Files in Japanese and English. Square Enix. pp. 5253. ISBN 4797334983.
 Studio BentStuff, ed. 2005. Final Fantasy VII Ultimania  in Japanese. Square Enix. p. 57. ISBN 4757515200.
 Square Co September 7, 1997. Final Fantasy VII. PlayStation. SCE America. Shera: He pushed the Emergency Engine Shut Down switch, aborting the mission, to save my life. After that, the Space Program was cut back and the launch was canceled.
 Studio BentStuff, ed. 2005. Final Fantasy VII Ultimania  in Japanese. Square Enix. p. 46. ISBN 4757515200.
 Studio BentStuff, ed. 2005. Final Fantasy VII Ultimania  in Japanese. Square Enix. pp. 56, 58. ISBN 4757515200.
 Studio BentStuff, ed. 2005. Final Fantasy VII Ultimania  in Japanese. Square Enix. p. 198. ISBN 4757515200.
 Studio BentStuff, ed. 2005. Final Fantasy VII Ultimania  in Japanese. Square Enix. pp. 210215. ISBN 4757515200.
 Square September 7, 1997. Final Fantasy VII. PlayStation. SCE America. Ifalna: A small number of the surviving Cetra defeated Jenova, and confined it.
   VII. Famitsu. Enterbrain 1224. May 10, 2012.
 Square Co September 7, 1997. Final Fantasy VII. PlayStation. SCE America. Aerith: You okay? This is a church in the Sector 5 slums. You suddenly fell on top of me. You really gave me quite a scare.  Cloud: ......I came crashing down?  Aerith: The roof and the flower bed must have broken your fall. Youre lucky.
 Square Co September 7, 1997. Final Fantasy VII. PlayStation. SCE America. Aerith: Say, Cloud. Have you ever been a bodyguard? You DO do everything, right?  Cloud: Yeah, thats right.  Aerith: Then, get me out of here.
 Square Co September 7, 1997. Final Fantasy VII. PlayStation. SCE America. Don Corneo: Shinras trying to crush a small rebel group called AVALANCHE, and want to infiltrate their hideout. And theyre really going to crush them...literally. By breaking the support holding up the plate above them.  Tifa: Break the support!?  Don Corneo: You know whats going to happen? The platell go PING and everythings gonna go BAMMM!! I heard their hideouts in the Sector 7 Slums...
 Square Co September 7, 1997. Final Fantasy VII. PlayStation. SCE America. Cloud: Why is Shinra after Aerith?  Elmyra: Aerith is an Ancient Cetra. The sole survivor.
 Square Co September 7, 1997. Final Fantasy VII. PlayStation. SCE America. President Shinra: Shes the last surviving Ancient... Dont you know? They called themselves the Cetra and lived thousands of years ago. Now they are just a forgotten page in history.  Red XIII: Cetra... That girl, is she a survivor of the Cetra?  President Shinra: Cetra, or the Ancients will show us the way to the Promised Land. Im expecting a lot out of her.  Red XIII: The Promised Land? Isnt that just a legend?  President Shinra: Even so, its just too appealing to not to pursue. Its been said the Promised Land is very fertile. ...If the land is fertile...  Barret: Then theres gotta be Mako!  President Shinra: Exactly. That is why our moneysucking Mako Reactor is a necessity. The abundant Mako will just come out on its own.
 Square Co September 7, 1997. Final Fantasy VII. PlayStation. SCE America. Cloud: ...Did it get away? Jenova...?  Red XIII: Jenova Specimen... Looks like it went to the upper floor using that elevator for the specimens.
 Square Co September 7, 1997. Final Fantasy VII. PlayStation. SCE America. Aerith: How do you intend to become one with the Planet?  Sephiroth: Its simple. Once the Planet is hurt, it gathers Spirit Energy to heal the injury. The amount of energy gathered depends on the size of the injury. ...What would happen if there was an injury that threatened the very life of the Planet? Think how much energy would be gathered! Ha ha ha! And at the center of that injury, will be me. All that boundless energy will be mine. By merging with all the energy of the Planet, I will become a new life form, a new existence. Melding with the Planet... I will cease to exist as I am now. Only to be reborn as a god to rule over every soul.  Aerith: An injury powerful enough to destroy the Planet? Injure... the Planet?  Sephiroth: Behold that mural. The Ultimate Destructive Magic... Meteor.
 Studio BentStuff, ed. 2005. Final Fantasy VII Ultimania  in Japanese. Square Enix. pp. 210215. ISBN 4757515200.
 Square Co September 7, 1997. Final Fantasy VII. PlayStation. SCE America. Cloud: Sephiroth! I know youre listening! I know what you want to say! That I wasnt in Nibelheim five years ago. Thats it, isnt it?  Sephiroth: I see you finally understand.  Cloud: But, I want to ask you one thing. Why... why are you doing this?  Sephiroth: Ha, ha, ha...... I want to take you back to your real self. The one who gave me the Black Materia that day... Who would have ever thought a failed experiment would prove so useful? Hojo would die if he knew.  Cloud: Hojo!? What does he have to do with me!?  Sephiroth: Five years ago you were... ...constructed by Hojo, piece by piece, right after Nibelheim was burnt. A puppet made up of vibrant Jenova cells, her knowledge, and the power of Mako.
 Studio BentStuff, ed. 2005. Final Fantasy VII Ultimania  in Japanese. Square Enix. p. 58. ISBN 4757515200.
 Square September 7, 1997. Final Fantasy VII. PlayStation. SCE America. Cloud: I never was in SOLDIER. I made up the stories about what happened to me five years ago, about being in SOLDIER. I left my village looking for glory, but never made it in to SOLDIER...... I was so ashamed of being so weak; then I heard this story from my friend Zack... And I created an illusion of myself made up of what I had seen in my life..... And I continued to play the charade as if it were true.
 Studio BentStuff, ed. 2005. Final Fantasy VII Ultimania  in Japanese. Square Enix. p. 591. ISBN 4757515200.
 Leone, Matt January 9, 2017. Final Fantasy 7: An oral history. Polygon. Vox Media. Archived from the original on January 9, 2017. Retrieved January 11, 2017.
 The Making Of: Final Fantasy VII. Edge. Future plc 123: 108113. May 2003. Archived from the original on May 9, 2012.
 Final Fantasy VII. Computer and Video Games. Future plc 174: 106111. May 1996.
 Final Fantasy VII  1997 Developer Interviews. Shmuplations. Archived from the original on September 23, 2016. Retrieved January 13, 2016.
 Yoshinori Kitase interview. LEVEL in Swedish. Reset Media 25. May 2008.
 Exclusive Preview! Final Fantasy VII. Electronic Gaming Monthly. Ziff Davis 82: 7879. May 1996.
 Square Enix 1997. SquareSoft on PlayStation Collectors Video VHS in Japanese. Square Enix. ASIN B004FD5BLQ.
 Final Fantasy VII: An Interview With Squaresoft. Computer and Video Games. Future plc 191: 5359. October 1997. Archived from the original on March 11, 2016.
 Essential 50: Final Fantasy VII. 1UP.com. Ziff Davis. Archived from the original on July 21, 2012. Retrieved March 22, 2011.
 Stanton, Rick June 2, 2013. Final Fantasy 7 retrospective  The game that killed Squaresoft. Eurogamer. Gamer Network. Archived from the original on March 26, 2016. Retrieved May 5, 2016.
 Naora, Yusuke February 26, 2015. SMU Guildhall: The Visual Evolution of Final Fantasy Twitch.tv Video. Square Enix. Archived from the original on October 31, 2015. Retrieved October 31, 2015. Transcript in French Archived January 18, 2017, at the Wayback Machine.
 Final Fantasy VIII Kitase, Nojima, Naora and Nomura Interview. Official UK PlayStation Magazine 71. February 2001. Retrieved November 15, 2009.
 Gantayat, Anoop January 31, 2011. Latest on Final Fantasy Type0. Andriasang.com. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved February 21, 2014.
 Parish, Jeremy May 14, 2016. The Final Fantasist: A Conversation With Yoshitaka Amano. USGamer. Gamer Network. Archived from the original on May 12, 2016. Retrieved May 10, 2016.
 Juba, Joe April 27, 2016. The Art That Shaped Final Fantasy: Thoughts From Famed Artist Yoshitaka Amano. Game Informer. GameStop. Archived from the original on April 29, 2016. Retrieved May 14, 2016.
 Studio BentStuff, ed. 2007. Final Fantasy VII 10th Anniversary in Japanese. Square Enix. pp. 813. ISBN 9784757525603.
 FFVII Not Being Remade  Nomura. IGN. Ziff Davis. June 4, 2007. Archived from the original on March 28, 2016. Retrieved December 9, 2013.
 GameTrailers August 13, 2007. Final Fantasy Retrospective  Part V Video. YouTube.
 Gouskos, Carrie. Lucky Seven. GameSpot. Retrieved September 6, 2008.
 Kuo, Li C. June 25, 2007. Readers Choice Top 10 Most Cinematic Moments in Gaming. GameSpy. Archived from the original on October 15, 2007. Retrieved October 16, 2007.
 1  Aeriths Death. Top 100 Video Game Moments. IGN. December 2011. Archived from the original on January 18, 2017. Retrieved January 12, 2012.
  Vol.4  Game Maestro Vol. 4: DesignerIllustrator Volume in Japanese. Mainichi Communications. May 18, 2001. ISBN 9784839903879.
 VII   Final Fantasy VII: Book of Deconstructions  The Complete in Japanese. Aspect. July 31, 2000. p. 33. ISBN 4757700989.
 Gantayat, Anoop May 16, 2012. Nomura, Kitase and Nojima Discuss Final Fantasy VIIs Development. Andriasang.com. Archived from the original on March 13, 2016. Retrieved January 13, 2016.
 An Interview with Hironobu Sakguchi. Next Generation. No. 22. Imagine Media. October 1996. p. 84.
 Mitsuda, Yasunori November 1999. My Friends: Masato Kato. Our Millennial Fair. Procyon Studio. Archived from the original on January 27, 2011. Retrieved December 29, 2010.
 Schreier, Jason September 2, 2014. Things Are Very Different For The Creator Of Final Fantasy. Kotaku. Gakwer Media. Archived from the original on August 24, 2016. Retrieved January 13, 2016.
 You Should Know This Game: Final Fantasy VII. Computer and Video Games. Future plc 185: 88. April 1994. Archived from the original on March 17, 2016.
 VII   Final Fantasy VII: Book of Deconstructions  The Complete in Japanese. Aspect. July 31, 2000. p. 215. ISBN 4757700989.
 Ikumori, Kazuyuki March 20, 2015. SMU Guildhall: The Cinematic Evolution of Final Fantasy Twitch.tv Video. Square Enix. Archived from the original on October 11, 2015. Retrieved December 6, 2015. Transcript in French Archived January 18, 2017, at the Wayback Machine.
 McLaughlin, Rus April 30, 2008. IGN Presents: The History of Final Fantasy VII. IGN. News Corporation. p. 1. Archived from the original on January 28, 2014. Retrieved January 11, 2017.
 Schweitzer, Ben; Gann, Patrick June 17, 2006. Final Fantasy VII OST. RPGFan. Archived from the original on February 7, 2013. Retrieved July 28, 2008.
 Nobuo Uematsu Interview. RPGamer. July 8, 2000. Archived from the original on September 30, 2012. Retrieved August 5, 2008.
 Mielke, James February 15, 2008. A Day in the Life of Final Fantasys Nobuo Uematsu. 1UP.com. Archived from the original on July 16, 2012.
  in Japanese. Oricon. Archived from the original on October 22, 2012. Retrieved June 24, 2010.
  in Japanese. Oricon. Archived from the original on October 22, 2012. Retrieved June 24, 2010.
 FF XIIITOP3 in Japanese. Oricon. January 28, 2010. Archived from the original on January 20, 2013. Retrieved February 3, 2010.
 Gann, Patrick June 23, 2000. Final Fantasy VII Reunion Tracks. RPGFan. Archived from the original on January 16, 2013. Retrieved July 28, 2008.
  in Japanese. Oricon. Archived from the original on October 22, 2012. Retrieved June 24, 2010.
 Gann, Patrick February 25, 2004. Piano Collections Final Fantasy VII. RPGFan. Archived from the original on January 16, 2013. Retrieved July 28, 2008.
  in Japanese. Oricon. Archived from the original on October 22, 2012. Retrieved June 24, 2010.
 PS 20FFVIIPS19951019963. Dengeki Online in Japanese. ASCII Media Works. June 18, 2014. Archived from the original on November 23, 2016. Retrieved January 14, 2017.
 Nelson, David D. September 6, 2013. A Final Fantasy VI Remake Was Once A Reality. PSExtreme. PSExtreme. Archived from the original on October 21, 2016. Retrieved January 14, 2017.
 VII  Square Enix. Square Enix in Japanese. Square Enix. Archived from the original on December 17, 2016. Retrieved January 14, 2017.
   VII. Japan Game Awards. Japan Game Awards. 1997. Archived from the original on March 20, 2016. Retrieved January 14, 2017.
 VII . Square Enix in Japanese. Square Enix. Archived from the original on April 27, 2016. Retrieved January 15, 2017.
 QA  Square Enixs Richard Honeywood. Edge Online. February 2006. Archived from the original on May 17, 2006. Retrieved March 28, 2013.
 Gantayat, Anoop August 31, 2012. Full Final Fantasy 25th Anniversary Ultimate Box Game List. Andriasang.com. Andriasang.com. Archived from the original on October 19, 2012. Retrieved September 2, 2012.
 PlayStation at E3: 1996. PlayStation Blog. Sony Interactive Entertainment. June 3, 2010. Archived from the original on September 28, 2015. Retrieved January 14, 2017.
 PlayStations Final Fantasy VII Marketing Blitz Continues. Business Wire. The Free Library. August 27, 1997. Archived from the original on November 26, 2014. Retrieved July 16, 2008.
 Parish, Jeremy November 26, 2014. Where Final Fantasy Went Wrong, and How Square Enix is Putting It Right. USGamer. Gamer Network. Archived from the original on May 10, 2016. Retrieved January 14, 2017.
 Square Enix Announces Release Date of Final Fantasy VII: Advent Children. Square Enix. May 15, 2005. Archived from the original on March 28, 2016. Retrieved March 18, 2013.
 SCEE 1997  Key facts and figures. Sony Computer Entertainment. 1997. Archived from the original on March 26, 2006. Retrieved November 25, 2006.
 Langsaw, Mark; Martin, Liam December 8, 2015. Everything you need to know about Final Fantasy VII Remake, including news, trailers and release dates. Digital Spy. Hearst Magazines UK. Archived from the original on December 11, 2015. Retrieved January 14, 2017.
 Alexander, Leigh April 10, 2009. Square Enixs Final Fantasy VII Hits Japanese PSN. Gamasutra. UBM TechWeb. Archived from the original on November 14, 2013. Retrieved January 14, 2017.
 Final Fantasy VIII Interview. IGN. Ziff Davis. October 2, 1999. Archived from the original on January 14, 2017. Retrieved January 14, 2017.
 Yamaha Corporation licenses its XG Soft Synthesizer to Square Soft. Yamaha Corporation. April 21, 1998. Archived from the original on February 2, 2008. Retrieved May 24, 2010.
 Eidos Interactive Acquires Exclusive PC Rights to Epic RolePlaying Game Final Fantasy VII. Coming Soon Magazine. Coming Soon Magazine. December 5, 1997. Archived from the original on December 10, 2015. Retrieved January 14, 2017.
 Finalizing the Fantasy. Electronic Gaming Monthly. Ziff Davis 94: 9194. May 1997.
 Fenlon, Wesley April 15, 2012. GameSpite Quarterly Interview: Richard Honeywood on The Rise of Square Localization. Wesley Fenlon Blog. Wesley Fenlon Blog. Archived from the original on December 26, 2016. Retrieved January 15, 2016.
 Campbell, Colin May 1997. Final Fantasy Mania. Next Generation. No. 29. Imagine Media. p. 30.
 Majeb, Athab June 2, 2009. Final Fantasy VII hitting PSN today. Joystiq. AOL. Archived from the original on June 11, 2009. Retrieved January 15, 2017.
 FINAL FANTASY VII For PC Out Now. Official Square Enix NA Blog. August 14, 2012. Archived from the original on June 2, 2017.
 FINAL FANTASY VII For PC Out Now. Official Square Enix EU Blog. August 14, 2012. Archived from the original on August 16, 2012.
 Elliot, Phil July 4, 2013. Final Fantasy VII launches on Steam!. Official Square Enix NA Blog. Square Enix. Archived from the original on June 18, 2017.
 Elliot, Phil July 4, 2013. Final Fantasy VII launches on Steam!. Official Square Enix EU Blog. Square Enix. Archived from the original on July 7, 2013.
 FINAL FANTASY VII PC DOWNLOAD Steam. Square Enix NA Online Store. Archived from the original on July 28, 2016. Retrieved June 2, 2017.
 FINAL FANTASY VII PC DOWNLOAD Steam. Square Enix EU Online Store. Archived from the original on June 2, 2017. Retrieved June 2, 2017.
 FFVII  for PCPCFFVIII. Famitsu in Japanese. Enterbrain. May 16, 2013. Archived from the original on May 22, 2016. Retrieved January 15, 2017.
 Kamen, Matt August 19, 2015. Final Fantasy VII iOS is finally here. Wired UK. Cond Nast Publications. Archived from the original on September 21, 2016. Retrieved August 19, 2015.
 Conditt, Jessica December 5, 2015. Final Fantasy VII is out today on PlayStation 4. Engadget. AOL. Archived from the original on December 6, 2015. Retrieved January 15, 2017.
 McWhertor, Michael. Final Fantasy 7 is coming to PlayStation 4 next year. Polygon. Vox Media. Archived from the original on March 5, 2016. Retrieved January 15, 2017.
 DotEmu  August 14, 2012. DotEmu. Facebook. August 14, 2012. Archived from the original on January 2, 2016. Retrieved February 10, 2017.
 Allen, Jennifer June 30, 2016. DotEmus bid to port Titan Quest to smartphones. Gamasutra. UBM TechWeb. Archived from the original on July 2, 2016. Retrieved February 10, 2017.
 Lazarides, Tasos July 7, 2016. After Almost a Year on iOS, Final Fantasy VII Is Out on Android. Touch Arcade. Touch Arcade. Archived from the original on December 13, 2016. Retrieved January 15, 2017.
 Announcing PlayStation Classics Full Lineup of 20 Games. PlayStation.Blog. Retrieved 20181103.
 Lee, Nicole September 13, 2018. Final Fantasy VII and other classics will hit Switch, Xbox One. Engadget. Retrieved September 13, 2018.
 Slo Mo, ed. October 1997. Official U.S. PlayStation Magazine 109. IDG Communications Media: 4647.
 Olafson, Peter. Final Fantasy VII Review. Archived from the original on February 22, 2010. Retrieved September 4, 2012.
 Final Fantasy VII for PlayStation. GameRankings. CBS Interactive. Retrieved June 9, 2018.
 Final Fantasy VII for PC. GameRankings. CBS Interactive. Retrieved June 9, 2018.
 Final Fantasy VII for PlayStation Reviews. Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on August 6, 2011. Retrieved July 13, 2013.
 Final Fantasy VII for iPhoneiPad Reviews. Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on January 2, 2016. Retrieved December 21, 2015.
 Final Fantasy VII PC. Allgame. Rovi Corporation. Archived from the original on November 14, 2014. Retrieved September 4, 2012.
 Computer and Video Games  Issue 192 199711EMAP ImagesGB. archive.org. Archived from the original on July 17, 2013.
 Alex C August 14, 2001. Final Fantasy VII: The game that made RPGs cool. Computer and Video Games. Future plc. Archived from the original on November 29, 2014.
 Edge Staff October 8, 1997. Final Fantasy VII Review. Edge. Future plc. Archived from the original on June 28, 2012.
 Electronic Gaming Monthly, 1998 Video Game Buyers Guide, p. 72
 Final Fantasy  famitsu Scores Archive. Famitsu Scores Archive. Archived from the original on July 14, 2008. Retrieved July 16, 2008.
 GameFan, volume 5, issue 9 September 1997, pp. 26  6770
 Nomali, Nicola March 30, 2009. Parish, Jeremy, ed. Final Fantasy VII: The Voice of the Planet. GameSpite Quarterly 13. Archived from the original on January 20, 2012. Retrieved January 29, 2012.
 Andy; Paul; Reiner, Andrew September 1997. Final Fantasy VII: Better Than All the Rest. Game Informer. Archived from the original on September 13, 1999.
 Dulin, Ron July 7, 1998. Final Fantasy VII PC. GameSpot. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on October 16, 2013. Retrieved March 8, 2010.
 Ward, Trent June 24, 1998. Final Fantasy VII review PC. IGN. News Corporation. Archived from the original on February 21, 2002. Retrieved March 8, 2010.
 Kennedy, Sam; Steinman, Gary, eds. 2001. Official U.S. PlayStation Magazine August 2001; issue 47. Ziff Davis. p. 98.
 Frost, Stephen, ed. September 1997. PlayStation: The Official Magazine 1. Imagine Media: 18.
 Wolf, Michael September 1998. Final Fantasy VII. PC Gamer US. Archived from the original on February 29, 2000. Retrieved April 14, 2010.
 Nguyen, Thierry September 25, 1998. Final Fantasy VII. Computer Gaming World. Archived from the original on October 1, 2000. Retrieved April 14, 2010.
 Bauman, Steve July 27, 1998. The consoles greatest RPG has a difficult PC birth. Computer Games Magazine. Archived from the original on February 25, 2002. Retrieved April 14, 2010.
 Tylwalk, Nick August 27, 2015. Final Fantasy VII Review: A Great Opportunity, Slightly Missed. Gamezebo. Archived from the original on January 16, 2017. Retrieved January 14, 2017.
 Slater, Harry August 25, 2015. Final Fantasy VII  A classic RPG, but not a classic port. Pocket Gamer. Steel Media. Retrieved January 14, 2017.
 Castomel. Final Fantasy VIIReview. RPGamer. CraveOnline. Archived from the original on March 6, 2016. Retrieved July 16, 2008.
 Highwind, Dan. Final Fantasy VII  Review. RPGamer. Archived from the original on September 27, 2015.
 Musgrave, Shaun August 24, 2015. Final Fantasy 7 Review  Square Enixs Classic, With A Few Clouds In The Sky. TouchArcade. Archived from the original on January 13, 2017. Retrieved January 14, 2017.
 Final Fantasy VII Quiz. VideoGame Spot. February 4, 1997. Quoted in Final Fantasy VII Enthusiast Coverage PDF. Polygon Part of a collection of internal SCEA documents compiled by former Sony senior product manager David Bamberger for Final Fantasy 7: An oral history. Vox Media. January 9, 2017 First published c. March 1997. p. 18. Retrieved May 13, 2018.
 Gaming Gossip. Electronic Gaming Monthly. No. 93. Ziff Davis. April 1997. p. 28. ... more than 2 million copies were sold the first two days ...
 Retailers Nationwide Break Official Release Date of PlayStations Final Fantasy VII Videogame. Find Articles. Business Wire. September 1997.
 PlayStations Final Fantasy VII Breaks Industry Records in Debut Weekend. Find Articles. Business Wire. September 1997.
 PlayStations Final Fantasy VII Has Sold More Than Half a Million Copies to Date. Find Articles. Business Wire. September 1997.
 Final Fantasy VII For PlayStation Hits MillionUnit Mark; Latest SellThrough Numbers Make Squares Final Fantasy VII Worldwide Best Seller. Find Articles. Business Wire. December 4, 1997.
 Crisis Core Final Fantasy VII. Square Enix. 2006. Archived from the original on August 1, 2008. Retrieved July 16, 2008.
 McCarthy, Dave April 28, 2008. Crisis Core: Final Fantasy VII UK Interview. IGN. Archived from the original on February 21, 2009. Retrieved December 3, 2008.
 2006TOP500 2006 Game Software Annual Sales Top 500. Famits Gmu Hakusho 2007 2007 Famitsu Game Whitebook 2007 in Japanese. Tokyo: Enterbrain. 2007. p. 387. ISBN 9784757735774. JPNO 21240454. Archived from the original on June 26, 2015.
 Webster, Andrew May 2010. Masterpiece: Final Fantasy VII. Ars Technica. Archived from the original on January 30, 2012. Retrieved February 8, 2012.
 Final Fantasy Retrospective Part V GameTrailers.com feature. GameTrailers. August 13, 2007. Archived from the original on December 8, 2009. Retrieved July 16, 2008.
 Kraus, Alex August 29, 2006. Dirge of Cerberus defies expectations, for better and worse. USA Today. Archived from the original on August 6, 2011. Retrieved July 16, 2008.
 GameSpot Editorial Team. The Greatest Games of All Time. GameSpot. Archived from the original on December 19, 2008. Retrieved July 16, 2008.
 Yip, Spencer August 19, 2015. Final Fantasy VII Has Sold Over 11 Million Units Worldwide. Siliconera. Curse, Inc. Archived from the original on March 24, 2016. Retrieved March 26, 2017.
 Final Fantasy VII Review. GameFan. Metropolis Media Volume 5 Issue 9: 6869. September 1997.
 Long, Andrew. Final Fantasy VIIReview. RPGamer. Archived from the original on March 6, 2016. Retrieved July 16, 2008.
 Olafson, Peter November 24, 2000. Review: Final Fantasy VII. GamePro. Archived from the original on October 23, 2008. Retrieved July 16, 2008.
 Final Fantasy VII. Next Generation Magazine. June 24, 1998. Archived from the original on December 5, 1998. Retrieved April 14, 2010.
 1998 1st Interactive Achievement Awards. Academy of Interactive Arts  Sciences. 1998. Archived from the original on October 23, 2010. Retrieved December 29, 2011.
 Origins Awards winners. Origins Awards, RPGnet. July 6, 1998. Retrieved December 29, 2011.
 Readers Choice Awards. Electronic Gaming Monthly 104: 100. March 1998.
 Electronic Gaming Monthly, 1998 Video Game Buyers Guide, pp. 1636
 EGM staff 2001. Electronic Gaming Monthlys 100 Best Games of All Time. Archived from the original on June 20, 2003. Retrieved February 14, 2011.
 Retro Gamer issue 9, p. 61
 IGNs Top 100 Games of All Time. IGN. 2018. Retrieved August 11, 2018.
 Chris Leigh November 14, 2005. The Greatest 100 Games Ever: 51. PALGN. Archived from the original on June 17, 2014.
 2: Final Fantasy VII, Empire, accessed February 25, 2011
 Stuff, September 2008, p. 125
 Cork, Jeff November 16, 2009. Game Informers Top 100 Games of All Time Circa Issue 100. Game Informer. Archived from the original on February 13, 2016. Retrieved December 10, 2013.
 The Game Informer staff December 2009. The Top 200 Games of All Time. Game Informer 200: 4479. ISSN 10676392. OCLC 27315596.
 Satterfield, Shane; Fielder, Lauren 2001. 15 Most Influential Games of All Time. GameSpot. CNET. Archived from the original on May 20, 2007.
 Boba Fatt; the GamePros. Feature: The 52 Most Important Video Games of All Time page 4 of 8. GamePro. Archived from the original on September 13, 2008. Retrieved April 25, 2007.
 GamePro Staff June 24, 2009. 20 Games That Changed Gaming Forever. GamePro. PC World. Archived from the original on March 14, 2017. Retrieved January 11, 2017.
 AllTIME 100 Video Games. Time. Time Inc. November 15, 2012. Archived from the original on November 15, 2012. Retrieved November 15, 2012.
 Readers Choice Top 300 Games Of All Time. Game Informer. Retrieved April 3, 2018.
 The 25 best PS1 games of all time. gamesradar. Retrieved April 3, 2018.
 Gantayat, Anoop November 22, 2007. Nomura Talks FFXIII. IGN. Archived from the original on November 23, 2007. Retrieved July 16, 2008.
 GamePro Staff November 5, 2008. The 26 Best RPGs of All Time. GamePro. Archived from the original on November 30, 2011. Retrieved February 14, 2011.
 Noble, McKinley May 18, 2010. The 30 Best PSN Games. GamePro. Archived from the original on September 24, 2010. Retrieved September 5, 2010.
 Hollander, Cooper March 12, 2012. The Top 7 Saddest video games that will make you cry. GamesRadar. Future plc. Archived from the original on October 29, 2012.
 GameSpy Staff. Top 25 Most Overrated Games. GameSpy. Archived from the original on July 6, 2008. Retrieved July 16, 2008.
 IGN Staff January 12, 2000. Readers Choice Game of the Century. IGN. Ziff Davis. Archived from the original on April 9, 2012. Retrieved December 30, 2011.
 Edge Staff March 3, 2006. Japan Votes on All Time Top 100. Edge. Future plc. Archived from the original on August 14, 2011. Retrieved July 16, 2008.
 Romano, Sal December 29, 2011. Famitsus top 20 list of tearinducing games. Gematsu. Archived from the original on March 6, 2012. Retrieved February 24, 2012.
 Spring 2004: Best. Game. Ever. GameFAQs. Archived from the original on February 9, 2009. Retrieved July 16, 2008.
 Fall 2005: 10Year Anniversary ContestThe 10 Best Games Ever. GameFAQs. Archived from the original on July 16, 2015. Retrieved July 16, 2008.
 Spring 2009: Best. Game. Ever. GameFAQs. Archived from the original on June 10, 2009. Retrieved June 10, 2009.
 Ashcraft, Brian March 6, 2008. Dengeki Readers Say Fav 2007 Game, Fav of All Time. Kotaku. Archived from the original on March 28, 2008. Retrieved March 29, 2008.
 ? Survey results Are There Emotional Games That Made You Cry? in Japanese. ASCII Media Works. October 15, 2008. Archived from the original on April 19, 2012. Retrieved May 7, 2012.
 Orland, Kyle February 22, 2008. Final Fantasy VII ported to the Famicom. Finally!. Joystiq. AOL. Archived from the original on January 28, 2015. Retrieved February 22, 2008.
 Studio BentStuff, ed. 2001. Final Fantasy X Ultimania  in Japanese. DigiCubeSquare Enix. p. 191. ISBN 4887870213.
 Kennedy, Sam; Steinman, Gary, eds. 2001. Official U.S. PlayStation Magazine August 2001; issue 47. Ziff Davis. p. 90.
 Behind The Game The Creators. Square Enix North America. Archived from the original on April 16, 2008. Retrieved July 16, 2008.
 Oliver, Glen July 11, 2001. Review of Final Fantasy: The Spirits Within. IGN. Archived from the original on September 26, 2008. Retrieved July 16, 2008.
 XIII. Dengeki Online in Japanese. ASCII Media Works. June 2, 2006. Archived from the original on September 27, 2013. Retrieved November 24, 2013.
 Witham, Joseph. Final Fantasy X International Europe Bound. RPGamer. Archived from the original on January 4, 2009. Retrieved July 16, 2008.
 Dunham, Jeremy November 24, 2003. Final Fantasy X2 Developer Interview. IGN. News Corporation. Archived from the original on August 10, 2012. Retrieved July 16, 2008.
 Square Enix Party Press Conference Announcement. Square Enix. May 14, 2007. Archived from the original on May 17, 2007. Retrieved July 14, 2007.
 IGN Staff November 21, 2002. Kingdom Hearts Final Mix Images. IGN. News Corporation. Archived from the original on June 29, 2011. Retrieved July 16, 2008.
  II  !!. Famitsu in Japanese. Enterbrain. March 24, 2007. Retrieved July 16, 2008.
 Square November 15, 2002. Kingdom Hearts. PlayStation 2. Square Electronic Arts. Hades: That little punk is your next opponent, okay? Now, dont blow it. Just take him out.  Cloud: The great god of the Underworld is afraid of a kid? Sorry, but my contract says  Hades: I know! You think I dont know? I wrote the contract! I know it says youre only required to kill Hercules in this tournament. But youve gotta fight that kid to get to him. Come on. Hey, its like that old goat says: Rule 11: Its all just a game, so let loose and have fun with it! I mean, a casualty or two along the way is no big deal, right?
 Gantayat, Anoop September 14, 2010. This Weeks PreTGS Flying Get. Andriasang. Archived from the original on September 16, 2010. Retrieved September 14, 2010.
 Hollinger, Elizabeth 1997. Primas Official Strategy Guide Final Fantasy Tactics. United States of America: Prima Publishing. p. 82. ISBN 0761512462.
 Goldfarb, Andrew. Final Fantasy 7s Cloud Coming to Super Smash Bros Wii U, 3DS. IGN. Ziff Davis. Retrieved November 12, 2015.
 Gantayat, Anoop October 27, 2004. New Final Fantasy VII For PSP. IGN. News Corporation. Archived from the original on December 16, 2014. Retrieved September 15, 2008.
 Gantayat, Anoop May 27, 2004. Before Crisis FF7 Details. IGN. Archived from the original on March 7, 2016. Retrieved October 8, 2008.
 Watanabe, Yukari, ed. 2006. Final Fantasy VII Advent Children  Reunion Files  in Japanese. SoftBank. p. 95. ISBN 4797334983.
 Dunham, Jeremy August 11, 2006. Dirge of Cerberus: Final Fantasy VII Review. IGN. News Corporation. Archived from the original on May 25, 2011. Retrieved October 8, 2008.
 IGN Staff May 17, 2006. Crisis Core FFVII Update. IGN. News Corporation. Archived from the original on February 7, 2012. Retrieved October 8, 2008.
 Studio BentStuff, ed. 2005. Final Fantasy VII Ultimania  in Japanese. Square Enix. p. 572. ISBN 4757515200.
 Cassady, David; Games, Brady June 1, 1998. Final Fantasy VII: Official Strategy Guide. Brady. ISBN 1566867827.
 Buchanan, Levi March 10, 2005. Final Fantasy VII Snowboarding. IGN. News Corporation. Archived from the original on January 18, 2014. Retrieved July 16, 2008.
 Palley, Steve April 5, 2005. Final Fantasy VII Snowboarding Review. GameSpot. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on December 30, 2013. Retrieved September 17, 2008.
 Square Enix Brings Final Fantasy VII Snowboarding and Musashi Mobile Samurai 3D Titles to V CAST from Verizon Wireless. Square Enix. March 14, 2005. Archived from the original on September 30, 2012. Retrieved September 17, 2008.
 eBooks.com. eBooks.com The Worlds Leading Source of eBooks. sec.ebooks.com. Retrieved 20180429.
 Ishaan December 19, 2014. Cloud And Reno Engage In A Bike Duel In Final Fantasy VII GBike Trailer. Siliconera. Archived from the original on August 23, 2016. Retrieved January 10, 2017.
 The Compilation of Final Fantasy VII Ultimania Translations  The Lifestream. thelifestream.net. Retrieved April 20, 2018.
 Final Fantasy VII VR Coaster Coming To Universal Studios In Japan  VR News, Games, And Reviews. www.vrandfun.com. Retrieved 20180421.
 Allen, Jason May 16, 2005. E3 2005: Eyeson the Final Fantasy VII Tech Demo. IGN. Archived from the original on November 6, 2012. Retrieved July 16, 2008.
 Sato June 23, 2015. Final Fantasy VII Remake Will Be More Realistic, But Wont Have New Characters. Siliconera. Retrieved January 10, 2017.
External links
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Final Fantasy VII.
Wikiquote has quotations related to: Final Fantasy VII
Official website Edit this at Wikidata
vte
Final Fantasy VII and Compilation of Final Fantasy VII
Video games
Final Fantasy VII Remake Before Crisis Dirge of Cerberus Crisis Core
Other media
Music Voices of the Lifestream Advent Children Last Order unlicensed Famicom remake
Characters
Cloud Strife Barret Wallace Tifa Lockhart Aerith Gainsborough Sephiroth Vincent Valentine Yuffie Kisaragi Zack Fair
Related games
Ehrgeiz Chocobo Racing Kingdom Hearts Super Smash Bros. for Nintendo 3DS and Wii U Super Smash Bros. Ultimate
vte
Final Fantasy series
vte
Japan Game Award for Game of the Year
Alcatel 9109HA.png1990s portalFinal Fantasy wordmark.svgFinal Fantasy portalFlag of Japan.svgJapan portal10 sided die.svgRoleplaying games portalPS3slimconsole.pngSony PlayStation portalDragon149393.svgSpeculative fiction portalWPVG icon 2016.svgVideo games portal
Categories: Roleplaying video gamesAmnesia in fictionScience fantasy video gamesCancelled Nintendo 64 gamesCancelled Super Nintendo Entertainment System gamesCyberpunk video gamesDystopian video gamesEcoterrorism in fictionEidos Interactive gamesEnvironmental mediaFinal Fantasy VIIFinal Fantasy video gamesGenetic engineering in fictionImpact event video gamesIOS gamesInteractive Achievement Award winnersNintendo Switch gamesOrigins Award winnersPlayStation console gamesPlayStation 4 gamesPlayStation Network gamesSingleplayer video gamesTerrorism in fictionUrban fantasy video gamesWindows gamesXbox One gamesVideo games developed in JapanVideo games featuring anthropomorphic characters1997 video gamesVideo games scored by Nobuo Uematsu

Final Fantasy X
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
Final Fantasy X
Ffxboxart.jpg
North American cover art featuring Tidus
DevelopersSquare Product Development Division 1
Publishers
JP: Square
NA: Square Electronic Arts
PAL: Sony Computer Entertainment
DirectorsYoshinori Kitase
ProducersYoshinori Kitase
Programmers
Koji Sugimoto
Takashi Katano
Artists
Yusuke Naora
Shintaro Takai
Writers
Kazushige Nojima
Daisuke Watanabe
Motomu Toriyama
Composers
Nobuo Uematsu
Masashi Hamauzu
Junya Nakano
SeriesFinal Fantasy
PlatformsPlayStation 2
Release
JP: July 19, 2001
NA: December 17, 2001
AU: May 17, 2002
EU: May 24, 2002
International
JP: January 31, 2002
GenresRoleplaying
ModesSingleplayer
Final Fantasy Xa is a roleplaying video game developed and published by Square as the tenth entry in the Final Fantasy series. Originally released in 2001 for Sonys PlayStation 2, the game was rereleased as Final Fantasy XX2 HD Remaster for PlayStation 3 and PlayStation Vita in 2013, for PlayStation 4 in 2015, Microsoft Windows in 2016, and will be released for the Nintendo Switch and Xbox One in 2019. The game marks the Final Fantasy series transition from entirely prerendered backdrops to fully threedimensional areas, and is also the first in the series to feature voice acting. Final Fantasy X replaces the Active Time Battle ATB system with the Conditional TurnBased Battle CTB system, and uses a new leveling system called the Sphere Grid.

Set in the fantasy world of Spira, a setting influenced by the South Pacific, Thailand and Japan,1 the games story revolves around a group of adventurers and their quest to defeat a rampaging monster known as Sin. The player character is Tidus, a star athlete in the fictional sport of blitzball, who finds himself in the world Spira after his home city of Zanarkand is destroyed by Sin. Shortly after arriving to Spira, Tidus joins the summoner Yuna on her pilgrimage to destroy Sin.

Development of Final Fantasy X began in 1999, with a budget of more than US32.3 million US47.4 million in 2017 dollars and a team of more than 100 people. The game was the first in the main series not entirely scored by Nobuo Uematsu; Masashi Hamauzu and Junya Nakano were signed as Uematsus fellow composers. Final Fantasy X was both a critical and commercial success, selling over 8 million units worldwide.2 It is widely considered to be one of the greatest video games of all time. On March 3, 2003, it was followed by Final Fantasy X2, making it the first Final Fantasy game to have a direct game sequel.


Contents
1Gameplay
1.1Combat
1.2Sphere Grid
1.3Blitzball
2Plot
2.1Setting and characters
2.2Story
3Development
3.1Influences
3.2Design
3.3Music
4Versions and merchandise
4.1HD Remaster
5Reception
5.1Sales
5.2Critical reception
5.3Awards
6Legacy
7See also
8Notes
9References
10External links
Gameplay
Like previous games in the series, Final Fantasy X is presented in a thirdperson perspective, with players directly navigating the main character, Tidus, around the world to interact with objects and people. Unlike previous games, however, the world and town maps have been fully integrated, with terrain outside of cities rendered to scale. As Tidus explores the world, he randomly encounters enemies. When an enemy is encountered, the environment switches to a turnbased battle area where characters and enemies await their turn to attack.3

The gameplay of Final Fantasy X differs from that of previous Final Fantasy games in its lack of a topdown perspective world map. Earlier games featured a miniature representation of the expansive areas between towns and other distinct locations, used for longdistance traveling. In Final Fantasy X, almost all the locations are essentially continuous and never fade out to a world map. Regional connections are mostly linear, forming a single path through the games locations, though an airship becomes available late in the game, giving the player the ability to navigate Spira faster. Like previous games in the series, Final Fantasy X features numerous minigames, most notably the fictional underwater sport blitzball.4

Combat

A boss battle using a headsup display to illustrate battle information
Final Fantasy X introduces the Conditional TurnBased Battle system in place of the series traditional Active Time Battle system first used in Final Fantasy IV. Whereas the ATB concept features realtime elements, the CTB system is a turnbased format that pauses the battle during each of the players turns. Thus, the CTB design allows the player to select an action without time pressure.5 A graphical timeline along the upperright side of the screen details who will be receiving turns next, and how various actions taken will affect the subsequent order of turns. The ordering of turns can be affected by a number of spells, items, and abilities that inflict status effects upon the controlled characters or the enemies.6 The player can control up to three characters in battle, though a swapping system allows the player to replace them with a character outside the active party at any time. Limit Breaks, highly damaging special attacks, reappear in Final Fantasy X as Overdrives. In this new incarnation of the feature, most of the techniques are interactive, requiring button inputs to increase their effectiveness. While initially the Overdrives can be used when the character receives a significant amount of damage, the player is able to modify the requirements to unlock them.7

Final Fantasy X introduces an overhaul of the summoning system employed in previous games of the series. Whereas in previous titles a summoned creature would arrive, perform one action, and then depart, the Aeons of Final Fantasy X arrive and entirely replace the battle party, fighting in their place until either the aeon wins the battle, is defeated itself, or is dismissed by the player. Aeons have their own statistics, commands, special attacks, spells, and Overdrives. The player acquires five aeons over the course of the game through the completion of Cloister of Trials puzzles, but three additional aeons can be obtained by completing various sidequests.4

Sphere Grid

Example of a Sphere Grid
As with previous titles in the series, players have the opportunity to develop and improve their characters by defeating enemies and acquiring items, though the traditional experience point system is replaced by a new system called the Sphere Grid. Instead of characters gaining predetermined statistic bonuses for their attributes after leveling up, each character gains Sphere Levels after collecting enough Ability Points AP. Sphere Levels allow players to move around the Sphere Grid, a predetermined grid of interconnected nodes consisting of various statistic and ability bonuses. Spheres are applied to these nodes, unlocking its function for the selected character.5

The Sphere Grid system also allows players to fully customize characters in contrast to their intended battle roles, such as turning the White Mageroled Yuna into a physical powerhouse and the swordsman Auron into a healer. The International and PAL versions of the game include an optional Expert version of the Sphere Grid; in these versions, all of the characters start in the middle of the grid and may follow whichever path the player chooses. As a tradeoff, the Expert grid has fewer nodes in total, thus decreasing the total statistic upgrades available during the game.8

Blitzball
Blitzball is a minigame that requires strategy and tactics. The underwater sport is played in a large, hovering sphere of water surrounded by a larger audience of onlookers.6 The player controls one character at a time as they swim through the sphere performing passes, tackles, and attempts to score. The gameplay is similar to that of the main game in the way that the controlled character moves through the area until they encounter an enemy. In this case, the enemy is a member of the opposing team. Status effects are also implemented in the minigame as each player can learn techniques that are equivalent to abilities in the main game.9

Blitzball is first introduced in the beginning of the game during one of the early cinematic sequences in which Tidus, the main character who is described as a star blitzball player, is part of an intense game. It is the only minigame that plays a role in the overall plot line as it is not only a main part of Tiduss character, but its also in the first scene where the games main antagonist, Sin is shown.6 Unlike with the other minigames, playing blitzball is mandatory near the beginning of the game, but it is later optional.9

Plot
Setting and characters
Main articles: Spira Final Fantasy and Characters of Final Fantasy X and X2
Final Fantasy X is set in the fictional world of Spira, consisting of one large landmass divided into three subcontinents, surrounded by small tropical islands. It features diverse climates, ranging from the tropical Besaid and Kilika islands, to the temperate Miihen region, to the frigid Macalania and Mt. Gagazet areas. Although predominantly populated by humans, Spira features a variety of races. Among them are the Al Bhed, a technologically advanced but disenfranchised subgroup of humans with distinctive green eyes and unique language.1011 The Guado, which are less human in appearance, with elongated fingers and other arboreal features. Still less human are the lionlike Ronso and the froglike Hypello. A subset of Spiras sentient races are the unsent, the strongwilled spirits of the dead that remain in corporeal form. In Spira, the dead who are not sent to the Farplane by a summoner come to envy the living and transform into fiends, the monsters that are encountered throughout the game;12 however, unsent with strong attachments to the world of the living may retain their human form. Other fauna in Spira, aside from those drawn from real animals, such as cats, dogs, birds, and butterflies, include the gigantic, amphibious shoopufs which are similar to elephants; and the emulike chocobo, which appears in most Final Fantasy games. Spira is very different from the mainly Europeanstyle worlds found in previous Final Fantasy games, being much more closely modeled on Southeast Asia, most notably with respect to vegetation, topography, architecture, and names.1

There are seven main playable characters in Final Fantasy X, starting with Tidus, a cheerful young teenager and a star blitzball player from Zanarkand, who seeks a way home after an encounter with Sin transported him to Spira.10 To do so, he joins Yuna, a summoner on a journey to obtain the Final Aeon and defeat the enormous whalelike Sin.13 Journeying with them are: Kimahri Ronso, a young warrior of the Ronso tribe who watched over Yuna during her childhood;14 Wakka, a blitzball player whose younger brother was killed by Sin;1516 and Lulu, a stoic black mage close to Yuna and Wakka.13 During the journey, they are joined by Auron, a former warrior monk, who worked with both Tidus and Yunas fathers to defeat Sin 10 years prior;17 and Rikku, Yunas cousin, a perky Al Bhed girl and the first friendly person Tidus meets upon arriving in Spira.10

Story
Tidus waits with his allies outside the ruins of an ancient city. He narrates the events that led to the present, spanning most of the games storyline.18 It begins in his home city, the hightech metropolis of Zanarkand, where he is a renowned blitzball player and son of the famous blitzball star, Jecht.19 During a blitzball tournament, the city is attacked by an immense creature that Auron, a man not originally from Zanarkand, calls Sin.20 Sin destroys Zanarkand and takes Tidus and Auron to the world of Spira.10

Upon arriving in Spira, Tidus is rescued by Al Bhed salvagers, who speak a language that is foreign to Tidus. One of them, Rikku, speaks the same language as Tidus and reveals that Sin destroyed Zanarkand 1,000 years ago.21 After Sin attacks again, Tidus is separated from the divers and drifts to the tropical island of Besaid, where he meets Wakka, captain of the local blitzball team, and shows off his blitzball skills.15 Wakka introduces Tidus to Yuna, a young summoner about to go on a pilgrimage to obtain the Final Aeon and defeat Sin1322 with her guardians Lulu, a mage of black magic, and Kimahri, a member of the Ronso tribe. Meanwhile, Tidus joins to help Wakka in the upcoming blitzball tournament to find a way back home.132324 The party travels across Spira to gather aeons, defending against attacks by Sin and its offspring called Sinspawn.25 After the tournament, they are joined by Auron, who convinces Tidus to become Yunas guardian.26 He reveals to Tidus that Yunas father, Lord Braska; Tiduss father, Jecht; and himself made the same pilgrimage to defeat Sin ten years ago.17 Tidus thought his father had died at sea ten years earlier.27 Following another attack from Sin, they are joined by Rikku, later revealed to be Yunas cousin.28

When the party arrives in the city of Guadosalam, the leader of the Guado, Seymour Guado, proposes to Yuna, saying that it will ease Spiras sorrow.29 At Macalania Temple, the group discovers a message from the spirit of Seymours father, Lord Jyscal; he declares that he was killed by his own son, who now aims to destroy Spira.30 The group reunites with Yuna and kills Seymour in battle;31 soon afterward, Sin attacks, separating Yuna and sending the others to Bikanel Island.32 While searching for Yuna at the islands Al Bhed settlement,32 Tidus has an emotional breakdown when he learns that summoners die after summoning the Final Aeon, leading to his desire to find a way to defeat Sin while keeping Yuna alive.3334 The group finds Yuna in Bevelle, where she is being forced to marry the unsent Seymour.3536 They crash the wedding and escape with Yuna.37 The group heads toward the ruins of Zanarkand, seen in the introduction of the game.182238

Shortly before arriving, Tidus learns that he, Jecht, and the Zanarkand they hail from are summoned entities akin to aeons based on the original Zanarkand and its people.39 Long ago, the original Zanarkand battled Bevelle in a machina war, in which the former was defeated.40 Zanarkands survivors became fayth so that they could use their memories of Zanarkand to create a new city in their image, removed from the reality of Spira.4041 One thousand years after its creation, the fayth have become exhausted sustaining the Dream Zanarkand, but are unable to stop due to Sins influence.3942

Once they reach Zanarkand, Yunalescathe first summoner to defeat Sin and unsent ever since43tells the group that the Final Aeon is created from the fayth of one close to the summoner. After defeating Sin, the Final Aeon kills the summoner and transforms into a new Sin, which has caused its cycle of rebirth to continue.44 Yuna decides against using the Final Aeon, due to the futile sacrifices it carries and the fact that Sin would still be reborn.45 Disappointed by their resolution, Yunalesca tries to kill Tidus group, but she is defeated and vanishes, ending hope of ever attaining the Final Aeon.46 After the fight, the group learns that Yu Yevon, a summoner who lost his humanity and mind, is behind Sins cycle of rebirth.42 This leads the group to infiltrate Sins body to battle Seymour, and Jechts imprisoned spirit.4748 With Sins host defeated, Tidus group vanquishes Yu Yevon.49 Sins cycle of rebirth ends, and the spirits of Spiras fayth are freed from their imprisonment. Auron, who had been revealed to be unsent, is sent to the Farplane.5051 Dream Zanarkand and Tidus disappear, now that the freed fayth stopped the summoning.52 Afterward, in a speech to the citizens of Spira, Yuna resolves to help rebuild their world now that it is free of Sin.53 In a postcredits scene, Tidus awakens under water. He then swims towards the ocean surface, and the screen fades to white.

Development
Final Fantasy Xs development began in 1999, costing approximately 4 billion approximately US47.4 million in 2017 dollars54 with a crew of over 100 people, most of whom worked on previous games in the series. Executive producer Hironobu Sakaguchi has stated that although he had concerns about the transition from 2D to 3D backgrounds, the voice acting, and the transition to realtime storytelling, the success of the Final Fantasy series can be attributed to constantly challenging the development team to try new things.1 Producer Yoshinori Kitase was also the chief director of Final Fantasy X, while the direction of events, maps and battles was split up between Motomu Toriyama, Takayoshi Nakazato and Toshiro Tsuchida, respectively.55565758 The development of the script for the game took three to four months, with the same amount of time dedicated to the voice recording afterwards.59 Kazushige Nojima collaborated with Daisuke Watanabe, Toriyama and Kitase on writing the scenario for Final Fantasy X.5759 Nojima was particularly concerned with establishing a connection in the relationship between player and main character. Thus, he penned the story such that the players progress through the world and growing knowledge about it is reflected in Tidus own understanding and narration.60

Influences
Character designer Tetsuya Nomura has identified the South Pacific, Thailand and Japan as major influences on the cultural and geographic design of Spira, particularly concerning the geographic location of the southern Besaid and Kilika islands. He has also said that Spira deviates from the worlds of past Final Fantasy games in the level of detail incorporated, something he has expressed to have made a conscious effort to maintain during the design process.61 Kitase felt that if the setting went back to a medieval European fantasy, it would not seem to help the development team advance. While he was thinking of different world environments, Nojima suggested a fantasy world that incorporated Asian elements.1 Subcharacter chief designer Fumi Nakashimas focus was to ensure that characters from different regions and cultures bore distinctive characteristics in their clothing styles, so that they could be quickly and easily identified as members of their respective subgroups. For example, she has said that the masks and goggles of the Al Bhed give the group a strange and eccentric appearance, while the attire of the Ronso lend to them being able to easily engage in battle.1 Tidus relationship with his father Jecht was based stories throughout the ages, such as the ancient Greek legends. This would eventually reveal the key of Sins weakness and eventual defeat.62

Design
Final Fantasy X features innovations in the rendering of characters facial expressions, achieved through motion capture and skeletal animation technology.6061 This technology allowed animators to create realistic lip movements, which were then programmed to match the speech of the games voice actors. Nojima has revealed that the inclusion of voice acting enabled him to express emotion more powerfully than before, and he was therefore able to keep the storyline simple. He also said that the presence of voice actors led him to make various changes to the script, in order to match the voice actors personalities with the characters they were portraying.63 The inclusion of voice, however, led to difficulties. With the games cutscenes already programmed around the Japanese voice work, the English localization team faced the difficulty of establishing Englishoriented dialogue and the obstacle of incorporating this modified wording with the rhythm and timing of the characters lip movements. Localization specialist Alexander O. Smith noted that they had to keep the localized sound file within the duration of the original Japanese, as longer files would cause the game to crash.64 He described the process of fitting naturalsounding English speech into the game as something akin to writing four or five movies worth of dialogue entirely in haiku form and of course the actors had to act, and act well, within those restraints.65

The game was initially going to feature online elements, offered through Squares PlayOnline service. The features, however, were dropped during production, and online gaming would not become part of the Final Fantasy series until Final Fantasy XI.6667 Map director Nakazato wanted to implement a world map concept with a more realistic approach than that of the traditional Final Fantasy game, in line with the realism of the games 3D backgrounds, as opposed to prerendered backgrounds.68 As a player of the games in the Final Fantasy series, battle director Tsuchida wanted to recreate elements he found interesting or entertaining, which eventually led to the removal of the Active Time Battle system, and instead, incorporated the strategyfocused Conditional TurnBased Battle system.69 Originally, Final Fantasy X was going to feature wandering enemies visible on the field map, seamless transitions into battles, and the option for players to move around the landscape during enemy encounters.65 Battle art director Shintaro Takai has explained that it was his intention that battles in Final Fantasy X come across as a natural part of the story and not an independent element.69 However, due to hardware limitations, this idea was not used. Instead, a compromise was made, whereby some transitions from the field map to the battle map were made relatively seamless with the implementation of a motion blur effect that would happen at the end of an event scene.60 The desire for seamless transitions also led to the implementation of the new summoning system seen in the game.69 Kitase has explained that the purpose behind the Sphere Grid is to give players an interactive means of increasing their characters attributes, such that they will be able to observe the development of those attributes firsthand.70 The developers experienced difficulty with the scene of Tidus and Yuna kissing, as they were not used to animating romance scenes. Visual Works director Kazuyuki Ikumori stated that this was due to the use of 3D models in the scene. Because of the negative response from female members of staff, the scene was remade multiple times.71

Music
Main article: Music of Final Fantasy X
Final Fantasy X marks the first time regular series composer Nobuo Uematsu has had any assistance in composing the score for a game in the main series. His fellow composers for Final Fantasy X were Masashi Hamauzu and Junya Nakano.72 They were chosen for the soundtrack based on their ability to create music that was different from Uematsus style while still being able to work together.73 PlayOnline.com first revealed that the games theme song was completed in November 2000. As Square still had not revealed who would sing the song, GameSpot personally asked Uematsu, who jokingly answered Its going to be Rod Stewart.74

The game features three songs with vocalized elements, including the Jpop ballad Suteki da ne, which translates to Isnt it Wonderful?. The lyrics were written by Kazushige Nojima, and the music was written by Uematsu. The song is performed by Japanese folk singer Rikki, whom the music team contacted while searching for a singer whose music reflected an Okinawan atmosphere.75 Suteki da ne is also sung in Japanese in the English version of Final Fantasy X. Like Eyes on Me from Final Fantasy VIII and Melodies of Life from Final Fantasy IX, an orchestrated version of Suteki da ne is used as part of the ending theme. The other songs with lyrics are the heavy metal opening theme, Otherworld, sung in English by Bill Muir; and Hymn of the Fayth, a recurring piece sung using Japanese syllabary.76

The original soundtrack spanned 91 tracks on four discs. It was first released in Japan on August 1, 2001, by DigiCube, and was rereleased on May 10, 2004, by Square Enix.76 In 2002, Tokyopop released a version of Final Fantasy X Original Soundtrack in North America entitled Final Fantasy X Official Soundtrack, which contained 17 tracks from the original album on a single disc.77 Other related CDs include feelGo dream: Yuna  Tidus which, released in Japan by DigiCube on October 11, 2001, featured tracks based on Tidus and Yunas characters.78 Piano Collections Final Fantasy X, another collection of music from the game,79 and Final Fantasy X Vocal Collection, a compilations of exclusive character dialogues and songs were both in Japan in 2002.80

The Black Mages, a band led by Nobuo Uematsu that arranges music from Final Fantasy video games into a rock music style, have arranged three pieces from Final Fantasy X. These are Fight With Seymour from their selftitled album, published in 2003,81 and Otherworld and The Skies Above, both of which can be found on the album The Skies Above, published in 2004.82 Uematsu continues to perform certain pieces in his Dear Friends: Music from Final Fantasy concert series.83 The music of Final Fantasy X has also appeared in various official concerts and live albums, such as 20020220 Music from Final Fantasy, a live recording of an orchestra performing music from the series including several pieces from the game.84 An odd note; the unreleasedpromo CDR Instrumental version of Madonnas What It Feels Like For A Girl done by Tracy Young was used in the blitzball sequences. Additionally, Swing de Chocobo was performed by the Royal Stockholm Philharmonic Orchestra for the Distant Worlds  Music from Final Fantasy concert tour,85 while Zanarkand was performed by the New Japan Philharmonic Orchestra in the Tour de Japon: Music from Final Fantasy concert series.86 Independent but officially licensed releases of Final Fantasy X music have been composed by such groups as Project Majestic Mix, which focuses on arranging video game music.87 Selections also appear on Japanese remix albums, called dojin music, and on English remixing websites.88

Versions and merchandise

Action figures of the characters Tidus, Yuna, and Auron
The Japanese version of Final Fantasy X included an additional disc entitled The Other Side of Final Fantasy, which featured interviews, storyboards, and trailers for Blue Wing Blitz, Kingdom Hearts, and Final Fantasy: The Spirits Within, as well as the first footage of Final Fantasy XI.89 An international version of the game was released in Japan as Final Fantasy X International in January 2002, and in PAL regions under its original title. It features content not available in the original NTSC releases, including battles with Dark versions of the games aeons and an airship fight with the superboss Penance.8 The Japanese release of Final Fantasy X International also includes Eternal Calm, a 14minute video clip bridging the story of Final Fantasy X with that of its sequel, Final Fantasy X2.90 The video clip was included in a bonus DVD for Unlimited Saga Collectors Edition under the name Eternal Calm, Final Fantasy X2: Prologue. It was first released in Europe on October 31, 2003, and featured English voiceovers.91

The international and PAL versions include a bonus DVD called Beyond Final Fantasy, a disc including interviews with the games developers, and two of the games English voice actors, James Arnold Taylor Tidus and Hedy Burress Yuna. Also included are trailers for Final Fantasy X and Kingdom Hearts, a concept and promotional art gallery for the game, and a music video of Suteki da ne performed by Rikki.92 In 2005, a compilation featuring Final Fantasy X and Final Fantasy X2 was released in Japan as Final Fantasy XX2 Ultimate Box.93

Square also produced various types of merchandise94 and several books, including The Art of Final Fantasy X and three Ultimania guides, a series of artbooksstrategy guides published by DigiCube in Japan. They feature original artwork from Final Fantasy X, offer gameplay walkthroughs, expand upon many aspects of the games storyline and feature several interviews with the games designers. There are three books in the series: Final Fantasy X Scenario Ultimania, Final Fantasy X Battle Ultimania, and Final Fantasy X Ultimania .95 On December 18, 2012 the game was rereleased as part of the Final Fantasy 25th Anniversary Ultimate Box release.96

HD Remaster
Main article: Final Fantasy XX2 HD Remaster
On September 13, 2011, Square Enix announced that Final Fantasy X would be rereleased in highdefinition for the PlayStation 3 and PlayStation Vita, in celebration of the games 10year anniversary.97 In January 2012, production of the game had started. Producer Yoshinori Kitase was once again involved in the production of the game, wishing to work on its quality.98 On February 18, 2013 the first footage of the PlayStation Vita version of Final Fantasy X HD was released, showing off HD models of Tidus, Yuna, Bahamut and Yojimbo.99 On March 19, it was confirmed that the PS3 version of the game would also include its sequel X2, and that it would be remastered in HD. The two HD remastered games for the PS3 were released under the title Final Fantasy XX2 HD Remaster on a single Bluray disc game,100 and was sold separately on game cartridges on Vita in Japan and sold together in North America, Europe  Australia as a set, with FFX being on a cartridge and FFX2 being included as a download voucher.101 Downloadable versions are available for both systems. Square Enix launched an official website for the two HD remastered titles in March 2013.102 The games contain all the content found in the International version, including Eternal Calm and Last Mission.103 During the PlayStation China press conference that took place in Shanghai on December 11, 2014, Square Enix confirmed Final Fantasy XX2 HD Remaster would be released for the PlayStation 4 in Spring 2015.104 It was released in North America on May 12, Australia  Japan on May 14 and Europe on May 15, 2015.105 It included enhanced graphics in full HD 1080p, the option to switch to the original soundtrack and the ability to transfer save files from the PS3  PS Vita versions. One year later on May 12, 2016, it was released for Microsoft Windows via Steam.106 It includes an autosave feature, 5 game boosters, 3 parameter changes, the option to skip FMVscinematics, 4K resolution support, audio settings and graphic options.

Reception
Reception
Aggregate score
AggregatorScore
Metacritic92100115
Review scores
PublicationScore
Edge910107108
Eurogamer9103
Famitsu3940109110
Game Informer9.7510113
GamePro55 stars111
Game RevolutionA112
GameSpot9.310114
GameSpy4.55 stars5
IGN9.51072
Award
PublicationAward
Japan Game AwardsBest Game Award116
Sales
Square expected the game to sell at least two million copies worldwide owing to the reduced PlayStation 2s fanbase, making it smaller than the last three released titles.117 However, within four days of its release in Japan, the game had sold over 1.4 million copies in preorders, which set a record for the fastestselling console RPG.118119 These figures exceeded the performances of Final Fantasy VII and IX in a comparable period,120 and Final Fantasy X became the first PlayStation 2 game to reach two million and four million sold copies.121122 In October 2007, the game was listed as the 8th bestselling game for the PlayStation 2.123 Final Fantasy X sold over 2.26 million copies in Japan alone in 2001, and sold 6.6 million copies worldwide by January 2004.124125 By July 2006, it had sold 2.3 million copies and earned 95 million in the United StatesUS115 million in 2017. Next Generation ranked it as the 11th highestselling game launched for the PlayStation 2, Xbox or GameCube between January 2000 and July 2006 in that country.126 As of 2017, the PS2 version of the game has sold over 8 million copies worldwide.2

The Ultimate Hits bargain reissue of the game in September 2005 sold over 131,000 copies in Japan by the end of 2006.127 In October 2013, Square Enix announced Final Fantasy X and its sequel Final Fantasy X2 have together sold over 14 million copies worldwide on PlayStation 2.128

Critical reception
Final Fantasy X received critical acclaim by the media. The Japanese video game magazine Famitsu and Famitsu PS2 awarded the game a nearperfect 3940 score.129 Another Japanese gaming magazine, The Play Station, gave the game a score of 2930. Famitsu, Famitsu PS2, and The Play Station expressed particularly favorable responses toward the games storyline, graphics, and movies.129 The game maintains a 92 out of 100 on Metacritic.115130 Producer Shinji Hashimoto stated that the overall reception to the game was excellent, having received praise and awards from the media.59

IGNs David Smith offered praise for the voice actors and the innovations in gameplay, particularly with the revised battle and summon systems, the option to change party members during battle, and the character development and inventory management systems. They also felt that the games graphics had improved on its predecessors in every way possible, and that the game as a whole was the bestlooking game of the series and arguably the bestplaying as well.72 Greg Kasavin of GameSpot praised the games storyline, calling it surprisingly complex, its ending satisfying, and its avoidance of roleplaying game clichs commendable with Tidus viewed as an appealing protagonist. He also lauded the music, feeling it was diverse and well suited to the various scenes in the game.114 Similarly, GamePro described its character building system and battle system as two of the best innovations in the series.111 The visuals of the game were commended by GameSpys Raymond Padilla, who referred to them as topnotch, as well as giving praise to the character models, backgrounds, cutscenes, and animations.5 The voice casting was praised by Game Revolution who noted most of them were above average and called the music rich.112

Edge rated the game considerably lower, criticizing many aspects of the game for being tedious and uninnovative and describing the dialogue as nauseating, particularly panning Tidus.107 Andrew Reiner of Game Informer criticized the games linearity and that players were no longer able to travel the world by chocobo or control the airship.113 Eurogamers Tom Bramwell noted that the games puzzle segments were depressing and superfluous, and that although the Sphere Grid was a nice touch, it took up too much of the game.3 The linearity of the game was positively commented on by GamePro who stated that a player would not be required to participate in sidequests or the minigame to reach the games conclusion, finding some of them unappealing.111 Game Revolution complained that cutscenes could not be skipped, some even being too long.112

Awards
Final Fantasy X received the Best Game Award from the Japan Game Awards for 20012002.116 In GameSpots Best and Worst Awards from 2001, it came seventh in the category Top 10 Video Games of the Year.131 Readers of Famitsu magazine voted it the best game of all time in early 2006.132 Final Fantasy X came in fifth on IGNs Top 25 PS2 Games of All Time list in 2007 and sixth in The Top 10 Best Looking PS2 Games of All Time.133134 In a similar list by GameSpy, the game took the 21st place.135 1UP.com listed its revelation during the ending as the thirdbiggest video game spoiler, while IGN ranked the ending as the fifth best prerendered cutscene.136137 In a Readers Choice made in 2006 by IGN, it ranked as the 60thbest video game.138 It was also named one of the 20 essential Japanese roleplaying games by Gamasutra.139 It also placed 43rd in Game Informers list of The Top 200 Games of All Time.140 In 2004, Final Fantasy X was listed as one of the best games ever made by GameFAQs,141 while in November 2005 it was voted as the 12th Best Game Ever.142 In a general overview of the series, both GamesRadar and IGN listed Final Fantasy X as the fourth best game.143144 At the sixth annual Interactive Achievement Awards in 2003, it was nominated for Outstanding Achievement in Animation and Console RolePlaying Game of the Year.145 At the end of 2007, it was named the ninth bestselling RPG by Guinness World Records.119 Readers from GameFaqs also voted it as Game of the Year during 2001.146 In 2008, readers of Dengeki magazine voted it the second best game ever made.147 It was voted first place in Famitsus and Dengekis polls of most tearinducing games of all time.148149 Both Tidus and Yuna have been popular characters in games in general due to their personalities and their romantic relationship.150151152

Legacy
Due to its commercial and critical success, Square Enix released a direct sequel to Final Fantasy X in 2003, titled Final Fantasy X2.90 The sequel is set two years after the conclusion of Final Fantasy X, establishing new conflicts and dilemmas and resolving loose ends left by the original game. Although the sequel did not sell as well as the original, 5.29 million units versus 8 million units, it can still be considered a commercial success. As a result of the titles popularity, Yoshinori Kitase and Kazushige Nojima decided to establish a plotrelated connection between Final Fantasy X and Final Fantasy VII, another wellreceived Final Fantasy game.153 In 2013, after the release of the HD Remaster, Nojima stated that he would like to see a second sequel to X, and if there were demand for it, it could happen.154 The minigame of blitzball has made it into other games, such as Final Fantasy X2, and was mentioned as a possibility for Final Fantasy XIV: A Realm Reborn.155

The advancements in portraying realistic emotions achieved with Final Fantasy X through voiceovers and detailed facial expressions have since become a staple of the series, with Final Fantasy X2 and other subsequent titles such as Dirge of Cerberus: Final Fantasy VII, Final Fantasy XII, XIII and its sequels, and XV also featuring this development. Traversing realtime 3D environments instead of an overworld map has also become a standard of the series. Final Fantasy X can be considered a pioneer in 3D RPG maps.156

Takeo Kujiraoka, director from Dissidia Final Fantasy NT, regarded Final Fantasy X as his favorite game from the franchise based on its emotional impact on the players as well as the multiple amount of playable content that surpasses 100 hours.157

See also

Book: Final Fantasy series
2000s portal
Video games portal
List of Square Enix franchises
Notes
 X Fainaru Fantaj Ten in Japanese
References
 Square December 20, 2001. Final Fantasy X International. PlayStation 2. Square EA. Levelarea: Beyond Final Fantasy: Producer.
 1 PS2: 8M IGN Japan
 Bramwell, Tom June 16, 2002. Final Fantasy X Review. Eurogamer. Archived from the original on December 7, 2008. Retrieved November 23, 2008.
 Zdyrko, Dave November 26, 2001. Final Fantasy X Preview. IGN. News Corporation. Archived from the original on May 9, 2008. Retrieved December 14, 2008.
 Padilla, Raymond December 15, 2001. Final Fantasy X Review. GameSpy. Archived from the original on July 15, 2012. Retrieved November 20, 2008.
 Vestal, Andrew 20030428. Final Fantasy X. GameSpot. Retrieved 20170724.
 Tidwell, Mickel. Final Fantasy X  Review. RPGamer. Archived from the original on June 21, 2013. Retrieved April 6, 2012.
 Clark, James Quentin October 6, 2008. Final Fantasy X International. RPGFan. Archived from the original on December 11, 2008. Retrieved November 23, 2008.
 Kasavin, Greg 20011214. Final Fantasy X Review. GameSpot. Retrieved 20170725.
 Square Co December 20, 2001. Final Fantasy X. PlayStation 2. Square EA. Rikku: Were Al Bhed. Cant you tell? Wait, youre not an Al Bhedhater, are you?  Tidus: I dont even know what an Al Bhed is.  Rikku: Where are you from?  Tidus: Zanarkand. Im a blitzball player. Star player of the Zanarkand Abes!  Rikku: Did you...hit your head or something?  Tidus: Um, you guys hit me.  Rikku: Oh, right... Do you remember anything before that?  Tidus voiceover: So I told her everything there was to tell about Zanarkand; about life there, blitzball, and Sins attack...and about how Auron and I were engulfed in this light.
 Square Co December 20, 2001. Final Fantasy X. PlayStation 2. Square EA. Levelarea: Macalania. Wakka: But you Al Bhed use the forbidden machina! You know what that means? Sin was born because people used machina!
 Square Co December 20, 2001. Final Fantasy X. PlayStation 2. Square EA. Levelarea: Kilika. Tidus: Whats a sending? Are we going somewhere?  Lulu: You truly are clueless. Are you sure its just your memory thats the problem? ... The dead need guidance. Filled with grief over their own death, they refuse to face their fate. They yearn to live on, and resent those still alive. You see, they envy the living. And in time, that envy turns to anger, even hate. Should these souls remain in Spira, they become fiends that prey on the living. Sad, isnt it? The sending takes them to the Farplane, where they may rest in peace.
 Square Co December 20, 2001. Final Fantasy X. PlayStation 2. Square EA. Levelarea: Besaid. Tidus: Were taking the same boat as Yuna, right? Why do we gotta wait here?  Wakka: Yuna came to Besaid ten years ago, when the last Calm started. ... Since then, shes been like a little sister to me and Lulu. But she had the talent...she became an apprentice. Now, today, she leaves as a summoner.  Lulu: This is our journey. We should leave together.
 Square Co December 20, 2001. Final Fantasy X. PlayStation 2. Square EA. Levelarea: Besaid. Lulu: Kimahri Ronso, of the Ronso tribe. Hes learned the fiends way of fighting. ... Wakka: Hes another of Yunas guardians. ... Yuna: Sometimes we dont understand him either. Kimahri doesnt talk much, anyway. But he has protected me since I was a child!
 Square Co December 20, 2001. Final Fantasy X. PlayStation 2. Square EA. Levelarea: Besaid. Wakka: Im Wakka, coach and captain of the Besaid Aurochs, brudda!
 Square Co December 20, 2001. Final Fantasy X. PlayStation 2. Square EA. Levelarea: Besaid. Wakka: My little brother, Chappu. He looked like you Tidus. ... He was with the Crusaders...when they fought Sin last year. He didnt make it. ... I became a guardian to fight Sin, ya?  Tidus: Revenge, then?  Wakka: That was the idea. But, Im more worried about a stupid game now than avenging my brother. Well, after the next tournament, Ill be a guardian fulltime.
 Square Co December 20, 2001. Final Fantasy X. PlayStation 2. Square EA. Levelarea: Luca. Tidus: Who are you, anyway? You knew my old man, didnt you?  Auron: Yeah.  Tidus: And you also knew Yunas father?  Auron: Thats correct.  Tidus: Hey, man, theres no way. Thats just impossible.  Auron: Nothing impossible about it. Jecht, Braska, and I...together, we defeated Sin, ten years ago. Then I went to Zanarkand, where I watched over you, so that one day, I could bring you to Spira.
 Square Co December 20, 2001. Final Fantasy X. PlayStation 2. Square EA. Levelarea: Introduction Zanarkand. Tidus voiceover: Listen to my story. This...may be our last chance.
 Square Co December 20, 2001. Final Fantasy X. PlayStation 2. Square EA. Levelarea: Zanarkand Dream. Zanar Commentator: Ten years later, the Jecht Memorial Cup tournament is today! The two teams that have won through to the finals are, of course, the Abes from AEast, and the Duggles from CSouth. I know theres a lot of people out there today to see the star of the Abes Tidus! In just one year, hes become the teams number one player! Hes Jechts blood, and the new hope of blitzball!
 Square Co December 20, 2001. Final Fantasy X. PlayStation 2. Square EA. Levelarea: Zanarkand Dream. Auron: Look! ... We called it Sin.  Tidus: Sin...?
 Square Co December 20, 2001. Final Fantasy X. Square EA. Levelarea: Al Bhed Salvage Ship. Rikku: Yeah, there is no Zanarkand anymore. Sin destroyed it a thousand years ago. So, no one plays blitzball there.  Tidus: ...Huh?! WhWhat you do mean, a thousand years ago? But I saw Sin attack Zanarkand! Youre saying that happened a thousand years ago? No way!
 Square Co December 20, 2001. Final Fantasy X. PlayStation 2. Square EA. Levelarea: Miihen Highroad. Yuna: The Final Summoning. Its the only way to defeat Sin. The only way. With it, we can call the Final Aeon. Thats the goal of the pilgrimage. The Fayth of the Final Summoning lies waiting in the far north, to greet summoners who complete their pilgrimage. At the worlds edge  in Zanarkand. ...  Auron: She means the ruins of a city destroyed a thousand years ago.
 Square Co December 20, 2001. Final Fantasy X. PlayStation 2. Square EA. Levelarea: Besaid. Wakka: A major blitzball tournaments coming up. All the teams in Spirall be there. Its so huge, Im sure someone there will recognize you! ... Itll be fun! Whaddaya say, huh? Come on, come on!  Tidus: ...Sure thing.
 Square Co December 20, 2001. Final Fantasy X. PlayStation 2. Square EA. Levelarea: S.S. Liki. Tidus voiceover: I was just fooling myself. Maybe it was that day...on the sea, under the burning sun... I started to give up hope. I was in a foreign world; I wasnt going home. This was my new reality, and I was stuck in it for good.
 Square Co December 20, 2001. Final Fantasy X. PlayStation 2. Square EA. Levelarea: Kilika. Tidus: So, whatre these sinspawn, anyway?  Lulu: Fiends. They fall from Sins body, and are left behind in its wake.  Wakka: Leave em alone and Sin comes back for em. Ya gotta be quick!
 Square Co December 20, 2001. Final Fantasy X. PlayStation 2. Square EA. Levelarea: Luca. Auron: Yuna  Yuna: Sir?  Auron: I wish to become your guardian. Do you accept?  ... Lulu: But why?  Auron: I promised Braska. ... And...Tidus comes too.  Tidus: Hi, guys. Eh...howdy.  Auron: This one I promised Jecht.
 Square Co December 20, 2001. Final Fantasy X. PlayStation 2. Square EA. Levelarea: S.S. Liki. Yuna: Youre a blitzball player, arent you? from Zanarkand, right?  Tidus: You...hear that from Wakka? ... Wakka... Wakka doesnt believe me at all.  Yuna: But...I believe you. ... Ive heard...that in Zanarkand, theres a great stadium, all lit up, even at night. ...  Tidus: How do you know that?  Yuna: A man named Jecht told me. He was my fathers guardian.  Tidus: to self J...Jecht...? out loud My father... his name is Jecht.  Yuna: Amazing! You know, our meeting like this must be the blessing of Yevon!  Tidus: Sounds like him, but it cant be him.  Yuna: Why not?  Tidus: My old man, he died. Ten years ago, off the coast of Zanarkand.  Yuna: IIm sorry.  Tidus: He went out to sea for training one day...and never came back. And no ones seen him since then.  Yuna: Why, thats the day that Jecht came to Spira!  Tidus: Wha  ?  Yuna: Its true! I first met Jecht ten years and three months ago! I remember that was the day my father left. The date fits, doesnt it?
 Square Co December 20, 2001. Final Fantasy X. PlayStation 2. Square EA. Levelarea: Macalania. Rikku: Well, my dads sister is Yunies mother, you get it?
 Square Co December 20, 2001. Final Fantasy X. PlayStation 2. Square EA. Levelarea: Guadosalam. Yuna: Seymour...He asked me to marry him!  Tidus: You serious?!  Auron: to Seymour You know what Yuna must do.  Seymour: Of course. Lady Yunano, all summonersare charged with bringing peace to Spira. But this means more than just defeating Sin. She must ease the suffering of all Spira. She must be a leader for the people. I proposed to Lady Yuna as a maester of Yevon.  Auron: Spira is no playhouse. A moments diversion may amuse an audience, but it changes nothing.
 Square Co December 20, 2001. Final Fantasy X. PlayStation 2. Square EA. Levelarea: Macalania Temple. Jyscal: Listen to me very carefully, for I shall tell you the truth about my son, Seymour. His mind is closed even to me, a maester of Yevon. But I can feel flames of darkness burning in his heart. He is using Yevon, the Guado, and even the summoners. If he is not stopped, he will surely bring destruction and chaos to Spira. I will leave this world soon, killed by my own son. ...  Auron: Wonderful.  Rikku: Will Yuna be all right?  Auron: Without us, no.
 Square Co December 20, 2001. Final Fantasy X. PlayStation 2. Square EA. Levelarea: Macalania Temple. Seymour: Yuna...you would pity me now? dies  Tromell: Lord Seymour! What happened here?!  Wakka: What...What have I done...?  Tidus: Wait a minute! Its not our fault at all! Seymour struck first; hes the bad guy!  Tromell: YYou did this?!  Auron: Yuna. Send him.  Tromell: No, stop! Stay away from him, traitors!
 Square Co December 20, 2001. Final Fantasy X. PlayStation 2. Square EA. Levelarea: Bikanel Island  Sanubia Desert. Rikku: Oh! Hey, guys! Wheres Yunie?  Tidus: Gone.  Lulu: Gone... Some guardian I am.  Rikku: Um... Theres something I wanna tell you, but promise you wont say anything. ... I know where we are. Were on Bikanel Island. Theres a place us Al Bhed call Home here. Yunies there, Im sure of it! Other Al Bhed mustve come and rescued her!  Wakka: Rescued? You mean kidnapped!  Tidus: What does it matter as long as shes safe?!  Rikku: Thats right! Anyway, I will take you there if you promise that you wont tell anyone about it.
 Square Co December 20, 2001. Final Fantasy X. PlayStation 2. Square EA. Levelarea: Bikanel Island  Home. Rikku: Summoners journey to get the Final Aeon. Yuna told you, didnt she? With the Final Aeon, she can beat Sin. But then...but then... If she calls it, the Final Aeons going to kill her! Even if she defeats Sin, it will kill Yunie too, you know!  Tidus: Was I the only one who didnt know...? ... I cant let her die! Ill find her!
 Square Co December 20, 2001. Final Fantasy X. PlayStation 2. Square EA. Levelarea: Fahrenheit. Tidus: Im telling you, Yuna wont die!  Cid: ...Boy, dont forget those words, cause if you do...Im gonna make you regret it.  Tidus: I wont. So you know where she is?  Cid: Course not! Thats why were gonna look! Using this airship!
 Square Co December 20, 2001. Final Fantasy X. PlayStation 2. Square EA. Levelarea: Fahrenheit en route to Bevelle. Lulu: The palace of St. Bevelle. Heart of Yevon. ... Rikku: Whats Seymour doing alive? Didnt we...take care of him in Macalania?  Auron: He is dead. As dead as Jyscal was. His attachment to this world kept him from the next. ... Yuna must be trying to send him.
 Square Co December 20, 2001. Final Fantasy X. PlayStation 2. Square EA. Levelarea: Bevelle. Seymour: You would play at marriage just for a chance to send me? Your resolve is admirable. All the more fitting to be my lovely wife.
 Square Co December 20, 2001. Final Fantasy X. PlayStation 2. Square EA. Levelarea: Bevelle. Tidus: Lemme go! Im gonna kill that Seymour!  Kimahri: Yuna said leave! We leave!  Lulu: Well join up with her later!
 Square Co December 20, 2001. Final Fantasy X. PlayStation 2. Square EA. Tidus voiceover: We escaped with our skins intact, but Yuna lost something. I could tell: her faith was shaken. Yevon had betrayed her. I felt like I should do or say something  anything  but nothing came.
 Square Co December 20, 2001. Final Fantasy X. PlayStation 2. Square EA. Levelarea: Dream Zanarkand. Fayth: Yes, youre a dream of the fayth. You, your father, your mother, everyone. All dreams. And if the fayth stop dreaming... ... Tidus: No! So what if Im a dream? I...I like being here.  Fayth: Weve been dreaming so long...were tired. Would you and your father... Would you let us rest?
 Square Co December 20, 2001. Final Fantasy X. PlayStation 2. Square EA. Levelarea: Dream Zanarkand. Fayth: Long ago, there was a war. ... A war between Zanarkand and Bevelle. Bevelles machina assured their victory from the start. Spira had never seen such power. The summoners of Zanarkand didnt stand a chance. Zanarkand was doomed to oblivion. Thats why we tried to save itif only in a memory.
 Studio BentStuff, ed. 2001. Final Fantasy X Ultimania  in Japanese. DigiCube. p. 84. ISBN 4887870213.
 Square Co December 20, 2001. Final Fantasy X. PlayStation 2. Square EA. Levelarea: Bevelle Temple. Fayth: If you defeat Yu Yevon, it will end. Tell me, what do you know about Yu Yevon?  Tidus: Hes what makes Sin come back!  Yuna: Sin is his armor. It protects him.  Fayth: Yu Yevon was once a summoner, long ago. He was peerless. Yet now he lives for one purpose: only to summon. ... Even if you defeated Sin with the Final Summoning, Yu Yevon will live. Yu Yevon will join with the Final Aeon. He will transform it into a new Sin.  Yuna: Yu Yevon merges with the aeon...  Fayth: Then, protected by this new Sin he has created, Yu Yevon continues the summoning.
 Studio BentStuff, ed. 2001. Final Fantasy X Ultimania  in Japanese. DigiCube. p. 82. ISBN 4887870213.
 Square Co December 20, 2001. Final Fantasy X. PlayStation 2. Square EA. Levelarea: Zanarkand. Yunalesca: Sin is eternal. Every aeon that defeats it becomes Sin it its place...and thus is Sin reborn.  Tidus: So thats why Jecht became Sin.
 Square Co December 20, 2001. Final Fantasy X. PlayStation 2. Square EA. Levelarea: Zanarkand. Tidus: I give up. So, what would an adult do, then? They know they can just throw away a summoner, then they can do whatever they like. Youre right. I might not even have a chance. But no way am I gonna just stand here and let Yuna go. And what Auron said about there being a way...I think its true. ... Ill go ask Yunalesca. Shes got to know something.  Rikku: You really think shell help you?  Tidus: I dont know, but I have to try. This is my story. Itll go the way I want it...or Ill end it here.
 Square Co December 20, 2001. Final Fantasy X. PlayStation 2. Square EA. Levelarea: Zanarkand. Yunalesca: If I die, so does the Final Aeon. And with it...Spiras only hope.  Tidus: Then well find Spira a new hope!
 Square Co December 20, 2001. Final Fantasy X. PlayStation 2. Square EA. Levelarea: Sin. Seymour: Sin has chosen me. I am part of Sin! I am one with Sin, forever! Immortal!  Tidus: Sin just absorbed you.  Seymour: I will learn to control it, from within. I have all the time in the world! Since you were gracious enough to dispose of Yunalesca...the only means of destroying Sin is forever gone! Now nothing can stop us!
 Square Co December 20, 2001. Final Fantasy X. PlayStation 2. Square EA. Levelarea: Sin. Jecht: Well, I am Sin, you know. ...  Tidus: Thats enough! Lets finish this, okay?  Jecht: Youre right. Well, then...lets go! transforms into Braskas Final Aeon  Tidus: I promise thisll be quick! Hit me with all you got, Dad!
 Square Co December 20, 2001. Final Fantasy X. PlayStation 2. Square EA. Levelarea: Sin. Tidus: What Im trying to say is...after we beat Yu Yevon, Ill disappear!
 Square Co December 20, 2001. Final Fantasy X. PlayStation 2. Square EA. Levelarea: Celsius. Auron: I am also an unsent. You are not surprised?  Tidus: I think...I kinda knew. It was Yunalesca, wasnt it?
 Square Co December 20, 2001. Final Fantasy X. PlayStation 2. Square EA. Levelarea: Sin. Auron: Dont stop.  Yuna: But I...  Auron: Its all right. Its been...long enough. This...is your world now.
 Square Co December 20, 2001. Final Fantasy X. PlayStation 2. Square EA. Tidus: Yuna, I have to go. Im sorry I couldnt show you Zanarkand. Goodbye.  Wakka: Hey!  Rikku: Were gonna see you again...? ...  Yuna: to Tidus I love you.
 Square Co December 20, 2001. Final Fantasy X. PlayStation 2. Square EA. Yuna: Everyone... everyone has lost something precious. Everyone here has lost homes, dreams, and friends. Everybody...now, Sin is finally dead. Now, Spira is ours again. Working together...now, we can make new homes for ourselves, and new dreams. Although I know the journey will be hard, we have lots of time. Together, we will rebuild Spira.
 Long, Andrew. Financial Fantasy X. RPGamer. Archived from the original on February 6, 2009. Retrieved November 21, 2008.
 Interview: Final Fantasy X. Core Magazine. March 6, 2001. Archived from the original on April 13, 2001.
 Interview with Final Fantasy X Developers. The Madmans Cafe. January 19, 2001. Archived from the original on September 27, 2013. Retrieved April 14, 2013.
 Studio BentStuff. Final Fantasy X Ultimania Omega in Japanese. Square Enix. pp. 191193, 476.
 Square December 17, 2001. Final Fantasy X. PlayStation 2. Square. Scene: staff credits.
 Minkley, Johnny April 15, 2002. Interview: Square invades London. Computer and Video Games. Archived from the original on April 14, 2013. Retrieved April 14, 2013.
 Square December 20, 2001. Final Fantasy X International. PlayStation 2. Square EA. Levelarea: Beyond Final Fantasy: Event.
 Square December 20, 2001. Final Fantasy X International. PlayStation 2. Square EA. Levelarea: Beyond Final Fantasy: Character.
 Final Fantasy 10: Kitase reveals the secrets of its success. Gamestm. February 27, 2014. Archived from the original on November 7, 2016. Retrieved March 3, 2014.
 GameSpot Staff November 30, 2001. Final Fantasy X. GameSpot. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on February 13, 2009. Retrieved November 23, 2008.
 Mackey, Bob August 1, 2016. True Tales from Localization Hell. US Gamer. Archived from the original on August 1, 2016. Retrieved August 1, 2016.
 Birlew, Dan 2001. Final Fantasy X Official Strategy Guide. BradyGames. p. 268. ISBN 0744001404.
 PSM Staff February 2001. Monitor: Final Fantasy X Goes Offline. PlayStation: The Official Magazine. Future Publishing 42: 18.
 Avistetto, Jimmy. Final Fantasy X Not OnlineCapable. RPGamer. Archived from the original on February 6, 2009. Retrieved November 23, 2008.
 Square December 20, 2001. Final Fantasy X International. PlayStation 2. Square EA. Levelarea: Beyond Final Fantasy: Field.
 Square December 20, 2001. Final Fantasy X International. PlayStation 2. Square EA. Levelarea: Beyond Final Fantasy: Battle.
 Birlew, Dan 2001. Final Fantasy X Official Strategy Guide. BradyGames. p. 266. ISBN 0744001404.
 Behind The Scenes Of Final Fantasy Xs Kiss Scene. Siliconera. March 16, 2015. Archived from the original on November 10, 2016. Retrieved August 10, 2016.
 Smith, David December 18, 2001. Final Fantasy X Review. IGN. News Corporation. Archived from the original on February 15, 2002. Retrieved November 23, 2008.
 Huang, Michael. Interview by RocketBaby.net. nobuouematsu.com. Archived from the original on February 6, 2013. Retrieved November 23, 2008.
 Yukiyoshi Ike Sato November 29, 2000. FFX Theme Song Complete. GameSpot. CBS Interactive. Retrieved July 1, 2010.
 Square December 20, 2001. Final Fantasy X International. PlayStation 2. Square EA. Levelarea: Beyond Final Fantasy: Music.
 Gaan, Patrick; Schweitzer, Ben. Final Fantasy X OST. RPGFan. Archived from the original on April 11, 2008. Retrieved March 4, 2008.
 Rzeminski, Lucy. Final Fantasy X Official Soundtrack. RPGFan. Archived from the original on April 11, 2008. Retrieved March 4, 2008.
 feelGo dream  Yuna  Tidus. RPGFan. Archived from the original on April 9, 2008. Retrieved March 4, 2008.
 Maas, Liz; Thomas, Damian. Piano Collections Final Fantasy X. RPGFan. Archived from the original on April 16, 2008. Retrieved March 4, 2008.
 Rzeminski, Lucy. Final Fantasy X Vocal Collection. RPGFan. Archived from the original on April 16, 2008. Retrieved March 4, 2008.
 February 19, 2003. The Black Mages. DigiCube. SSCX10080
 December 22, 2004. The Black Mages II: The Skies Above. Universal Music. UPCH1377
 Schnieder, Peer May 11, 2005. Dear Friends: Music from Final Fantasy. IGN. Archived from the original on March 22, 2007. Retrieved March 1, 2006.
 20020220  Music from FINAL FANTASY. RPGFan. Archived from the original on January 20, 2013. Retrieved April 1, 2007.
 Distant Worlds  Music from Final Fantasy  Album Information. Square Enix Music Online. Archived from the original on April 9, 2012. Retrieved February 22, 2008.
 Album Information  Tour de Japon: Music from Final Fantasy DVD. Square Enix Music Online. Archived from the original on January 20, 2013. Retrieved February 22, 2008.
 Rzeminski, Lucy July 2, 2002. Project Majestic Mix: A Tribute to Nobuo Uematsu  Gold Edition. RPGFan. Archived from the original on June 19, 2012. Retrieved August 13, 2008.
 Game: Final Fantasy X PlayStation 2. OverClocked ReMix. Archived from the original on March 2, 2008. Retrieved March 4, 2008.
 Chronologist July 19, 2001. Final Fantasy X Ships, Includes FFXI Trailer. RPGFan. Archived from the original on February 6, 2009. Retrieved November 23, 2008.
 Dunham, Jeremy November 24, 2003. Final Fantasy X2 Developer Interview. IGN. News Corporation. Archived from the original on August 10, 2012. Retrieved November 24, 2008.
 Calvert, Justin September 10, 2003. Final Fantasy X2: Prologue for US and Europe. GameSpot. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on February 13, 2009. Retrieved November 26, 2008.
 Witham, Joseph. Final Fantasy X International Europe Bound. RPGamer. Archived from the original on January 4, 2009. Retrieved November 23, 2008.
 Gantayat, Anoop July 1, 2005. Square Enix Announces Ultimate Hits Collection. IGN. News Corporation. Archived from the original on January 13, 2009. Retrieved November 23, 2008.
 Final Fantasy X. Square Enix. Archived from the original on August 22, 2008. Retrieved November 27, 2008.
 IGN Staff August 20, 2001. Final Fantasy X Ultimania Guide. IGN. Archived from the original on August 6, 2011. Retrieved November 26, 2008.
 Gantayat, Anoop August 31, 2012. Full Final Fantasy 25th Anniversary Ultimate Box Game List. Andriasang. Archived from the original on October 19, 2012. Retrieved September 2, 2012.
 Final Fantasy X HD Remake Coming to Vita and PS3. IGN. News Corporation. September 13, 2011. Archived from the original on September 23, 2011. Retrieved September 13, 2011.
 Yip, Spencer January 2, 2012. Report: Final Fantasy X HD In Early Development. Siliconera. Archived from the original on January 4, 2012. Retrieved January 3, 2012.
 Check Out Final Fantasy X: HD Version for the PS Vita. Kotaku.com. Archived from the original on July 29, 2013. Retrieved July 16, 2013.
 Final Fantasy XX2 HD Remaster. Archived from the original on March 27, 2013. Retrieved March 23, 2013.
 Ishaan March 20, 2013. Yes, Final Fantasy X2 Is Getting An HD Remaster, Too. Siliconera.com. Archived from the original on March 22, 2013. Retrieved March 21, 2013.
 Final Fantasy X  X2 HD Remaster. Finalfantasyxhd.com. Archived from the original on July 14, 2013. Retrieved July 16, 2013.
 Kubba, Sinan November 18, 2013. Final Fantasy XX2 HD Remaster pushed back to March 2014. Joystiq. Archived from the original on November 19, 2013. Retrieved November 18, 2013.
 Ishaan December 11, 2014. Final Fantasy XX2 HD Remaster Announced For PlayStation 4. Siliconera. Archived from the original on June 24, 2016. Retrieved June 8, 2016.
 Scammell, David 20150303. Final Fantasy XX2 HD Remaster comes to PS4 in May. Video Gamer.com. Archived from the original on August 3, 2016. Retrieved 20160608.
 Schreier, Jason May 10, 2016. Final Fantasy X Pops Up On Steam. Kotaku. Archived from the original on May 11, 2016. Retrieved May 10, 2016.
 Edge February 2002; issue 107. Future plc. 2002. pp. 7677.
 SquareSoft. Edge Reviews Database. Edge. Archived from the original on August 13, 2011. Retrieved August 14, 2011.
 2  X. Weekly Famitsu. No.915 Pt.2. Pg.63. June 30, 2006.
 Final Fantasy  famitsu Scores Archive. Famitsu Scores Archive. Archived from the original on July 14, 2008. Retrieved July 16, 2008.
 Weigand, Mike December 14, 2001. GamePro: Final Fantasy X. GamePro. Archived from the original on September 27, 2010. Retrieved July 13, 2010.
 Liu, Johnny December 1, 2001. GameRevolution: Final Fantasy X. Game Revolution. Atomic Online. Archived from the original on November 2, 2009. Retrieved July 13, 2010.
 Leeper, Justin. Final Fantasy X. Game Informer. Archived from the original on February 24, 2005. Retrieved November 23, 2008.
 Kasavin, Greg December 14, 2001. Final Fantasy X Review. GameSpot. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on February 12, 2009. Retrieved November 23, 2008.
 Final Fantasy X ps2: 2001: Reviews. Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on September 17, 2008. Retrieved November 23, 2008.
 FF10!! 6 CESA GAME AWARDS. GPARA.COM. Archived from the original on August 26, 2011. Retrieved May 28, 2009.
 The History of Final Fantasy. GameSpot. Archived from the original on June 6, 2004. Retrieved June 11, 2012.
 IGN Staff July 19, 2001. Final Fantasy X Sells Like Crazy; World Not Shocked. IGN. News Corporation. Archived from the original on August 2, 2011. Retrieved November 24, 2008.
 Craig Glenday, ed. March 11, 2008. Record Breaking Games: RolePlaying Games. Guinness World Records Gamers Edition 2008. Guinness World Records. Guinness. pp. 156167. ISBN 9781904994213.
 IGN Staff July 24, 2001. Final Fantasy X Approaches 2 Million Copies Sold. IGN. News Corporation. Archived from the original on December 8, 2008. Retrieved November 24, 2008.
 IGN Staff January 7, 2001. FFX Tops Sales Charts. IGN. Archived from the original on February 6, 2009. Retrieved November 24, 2008.
 Varanini, Giancarlo January 30, 2002. Final Fantasy X sales meet expectations. GameSpot. News Corporation. Archived from the original on February 5, 2009. Retrieved November 24, 2008.
 Androvich, Mark October 26, 2007. PS2 celebrates 7th anniversary. Gamesindustry.biz. Archived from the original on February 5, 2009. Retrieved November 24, 2008.
 2001TOP300 2001 Game Software Annual Sales Top 300. Famits Gmu Hakusho 2002 2002 Famitsu Game Whitebook 2002 in Japanese. Tokyo: Enterbrain. 2002. Archived from the original on June 27, 2015.
 Calvert, Justin January 20, 2004. Final Fantasy X2 sells a million. GameSpot. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on December 7, 2008. Retrieved November 24, 2008.
 Campbell, Colin; Keiser, Joe July 29, 2006. The Top 100 Games of the 21st Century. Next Generation. Archived from the original on October 28, 2007.
 2006TOP500 2006 Game Software Annual Sales Top 500. Famits Gmu Hakusho 2007 2007 Famitsu Game Whitebook 2007 in Japanese. Tokyo: Enterbrain. 2007. p. 387. ISBN 9784757735774. JPNO 21240454. Archived from the original on June 26, 2015.
 Final Fantasy X sales in October 2013. Square Enix Japan. October 10, 2013. Archived from the original on February 17, 2016.
 IGN Staff July 13, 2001. Final Fantasy X Gets Rated in Japan. IGN. News Corporation. Archived from the original on September 17, 2008. Retrieved November 24, 2008.
 Final Fantasy X Reviews. Game Rankings. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on January 11, 2009. Retrieved November 24, 2008.
 The Best and Worst of 2001. GameSpot. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on February 3, 2002. Retrieved July 6, 2010.
 Edge Staff March 3, 2006. Japan Votes on All Time Top 100. Edge. Archived from the original on August 14, 2011. Retrieved November 24, 2008.
 IGN PlayStation Team March 16, 2007. The Top 25 PS2 Games of All Time. IGN. News Corporation. Archived from the original on February 28, 2009. Retrieved November 24, 2008.
 The Top 10 Best Looking PS2 Games of All Time. IGN. May 7, 2010. Archived from the original on June 29, 2010. Retrieved June 29, 2010.
 Top 25 PS2 Games. GameSpy. March 16, 2007. p. 6. Archived from the original on July 12, 2010. Retrieved July 5, 2010.
 Sharkey, Scott; Betenhausen, Shane; Nelson, Michael. Top 5 Videogame Spoilers. 1UP.com. Archived from the original on July 16, 2012. Retrieved June 2, 2010.
 The Top 10 Tuesday: Best PreRendered Cutscenes. IGN. News Corporation. June 20, 2006. Archived from the original on June 29, 2011. Retrieved June 29, 2010.
 Readers Picks Top 100 Games. IGN. News Corporation. June 20, 2006. Archived from the original on August 14, 2010. Retrieved June 29, 2010.
 Kalata, Kurt March 19, 2008. A Japanese RPG Primer  Final Fantasy X. Gamasutra. p. 15. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved November 25, 2009.
 Game Informer staff December 2009. The Top 200 Games of All Time. Game Informer 200: 4479.
 Spring 2004: Best. Game. Ever. GameFAQs. Archived from the original on February 9, 2009. Retrieved July 16, 2008.
 Fall 2005: 10Year Anniversary ContestThe 10 Best Games Ever. GameFAQs. Archived from the original on July 16, 2015. Retrieved July 16, 2008.
 The Top 7... Best Final Fantasy games. GamesRadar. March 19, 2008. p. 2. Archived from the original on June 15, 2011. Retrieved July 5, 2010.
 Ranking the Final Fantasy Series. IGN. News Corporation. December 9, 2009. p. 1. Archived from the original on June 15, 2010. Retrieved July 5, 2010.
 AIAS ANNUAL AWARDS  6TH ANNUAL AWARDS. Academy of Interactive Arts  Sciences. Archived from the original on October 23, 2010. Retrieved November 19, 2008.
 BEST OF 2001: Overall Game of the Year. GameFaqs. Archived from the original on December 19, 2011. Retrieved January 6, 2012.
 Ashcraft, Brian March 6, 2008. Dengeki Readers Say Fav 2007 Game, Fav of All Time. Kotaku. Archived from the original on August 7, 2009. Retrieved March 29, 2008.
 Romano, Sal December 29, 2011. Famitsus top 20 list of tearinducing games. Gematsu. Archived from the original on March 6, 2012. Retrieved February 24, 2012.
 ? Survey results Are There Emotional Games That Made You Cry? in Japanese. ASCII Media Works. October 15, 2008. Archived from the original on April 19, 2012. Retrieved May 7, 2012.
 Hooker, Heath. Top 10 Final Fantasy Characters. GameZone. Archived from the original on May 9, 2012. Retrieved June 14, 2012.
 Great Loves  Features at GameSpot. GameSpot. CBS Interactive. February 14, 2006. Archived from the original on May 18, 2007. Retrieved March 13, 2008.
 The 14 Best Videogame Couples. GamesRadar. February 14, 2006. Archived from the original on June 15, 2011. Retrieved February 14, 2010.
 Studio BentStuff, ed. 2001. Final Fantasy X Ultimania  in Japanese. DigiCube. p. 191. ISBN 4887870213.
 Sato December 26, 2013. Final Fantasy X Scenario Writer On The Possibility Of Final Fantasy X3. Siliconera. Archived from the original on December 27, 2013. Retrieved December 26, 2013.
 Schreier, Jason. The Makers Of Final Fantasy XIV Are Still Deciding How To Add Blitzball. Kotaku. Retrieved 20170722.
 Final Fantasy Retrospective Part VII. GameTrailers. August 28, 2007. Archived from the original on May 25, 2009. Retrieved April 6, 2009.
 Dissidia Final Fantasy NT Out Today. Blog PlayStation. January 30, 2018. Retrieved August 28, 2018.
External links
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Final Fantasy X.
Wikiquote has quotations related to: Final Fantasy X
Official Final Fantasy X website European
Final Fantasy X on IMDb
vte
Final Fantasy series
vte
Japan Game Award for Game of the Year
Categories: 2001 video gamesDeath in fictionDiscrimination in fictionFamily in fictionFiction about monstersFinal Fantasy video gamesFinal Fantasy XGovernment in fictionJapanese roleplaying video gamesMartyrdom in fictionMusic in fictionPatricide in fictionPlayStation 2 gamesPlayStation 2only gamesPropaganda in fictionRebellions in fictionRoleplaying video gamesRomance video gamesSacrifices in fictionSingleplayer video gamesSquare company gamesVideo games scored by Nobuo UematsuVideo games developed in JapanVideo games featuring female antagonistsWars in fiction

This is a featured article. Click here for more information.
Final Fantasy XIII
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
Final Fantasy XIII
Final Fantasy XIII EU box art.jpg
DevelopersSquare Enix 1st Production Department
PublishersSquare Enix
DirectorsMotomu Toriyama
ProducersYoshinori Kitase
ProgrammersYoshiki Kashitani
ArtistsIsamu Kamikokuryo
Writers
Daisuke Watanabe
Motomu Toriyama
ComposersMasashi Hamauzu
Series
Final Fantasy
Fabula Nova Crystallis
EngineCrystal Tools
Platforms
PlayStation 3
Xbox 360
Microsoft Windows
iOS
Android
ReleasePlayStation 3
JP: December 17, 2009
WW: March 9, 2010
Xbox 360
WW: March 9, 2010
JP: December 16, 2010
Microsoft Windows
WW: October 9, 20141
iOS, Android
JP: April 10, 2015
GenresRoleplaying
ModesSingleplayer
Final Fantasy XIIIa is a science fiction roleplaying video game developed and published by Square Enix for the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 consoles and later for the Microsoft Windows operating system. Released in Japan in December 2009 and worldwide in March 2010, it is the thirteenth title in the mainline Final Fantasy series. The game includes fastpaced combat, a new system for the series for determining which abilities are developed for the characters called Crystarium, and a customizable Paradigm system to control which abilities are used by the characters. Final Fantasy XIII includes elements from the previous games in the series, such as summoned monsters, chocobos, and airships.

The game takes place in the fictional floating world of Cocoon, whose government, the Sanctum, is ordering a purge of civilians who have supposedly come into contact with Pulse, the muchfeared world below. The former soldier Lightning begins her fight against the government in order to save her sister who has been branded as an unwilling servant to a godlike being from Pulse, making her an enemy of Cocoon. Lightning is soon joined by a band of allies, and together the group also become marked by the same Pulse creature. They rally against the Sanctum while trying to discover their assigned task and whether they can avoid being turned into monsters or crystals at the completion.

Development began in 2004, and the game was first announced at Electronic Entertainment Expo E3 2006. Final Fantasy XIII is the flagship title of the Fabula Nova Crystallis collection of Final Fantasy games and is the first game to use Square Enixs Crystal Tools engine. Final Fantasy XIII received mostly positive reviews from video game publications, which praised the games graphics, presentation, and battle system. The games story received a mixed response from reviewers, and its linearity compared to previous games in the series was mostly criticized. Selling 1.7 million copies in Japan in 2009, Final Fantasy XIII became the fastestselling title in the history of the series. As of 2017, the game has sold over 7 million copies worldwide.2 The Microsoft Windows version has sold over 700,000 copies according to SteamSpy. A sequel, titled Final Fantasy XIII2, was released in December 2011 in Japan and in February 2012 in North America and PAL regions. A second sequel, titled Lightning Returns: Final Fantasy XIII, which concludes Lightnings story and the Final Fantasy XIII series,3 was released in November 2013 in Japan and in February 2014 in North America and PAL regions. In September 2014, Square Enix announced the Final Fantasy XIII series has been widely successful and has shipped over 11 million copies worldwide.4


Contents
1Gameplay
1.1Battle system
1.2Crystarium
2Synopsis
2.1Setting
2.2Characters
2.3Plot
3Development
3.1Music
4Versions and merchandise
5Reception
5.1Linearity
5.2Response to criticism
5.3Windows port
6Sequels
7Notes
8References
9External links
Gameplay
The player directly controls the onscreen character through a thirdperson perspective to interact with people, objects, and enemies throughout the game. The player can also turn the camera around the characters, which allows for a 360 view of the surroundings.5 The world of Final Fantasy XIII is rendered to scale relative to the characters in it; instead of a caricature of the character roaming around miniature terrain, as found in the earlier Final Fantasy games, every area is represented proportionally. The player navigates the world by foot or by chocobo.6 Players may save their game to a hard disk drive using save stations, where the player can also purchase items from retail networks or upgrade their weapons.7 An ingame datalog provides a bestiary and incidental information about the world of Final Fantasy XIII.8 The Final Fantasy XIII Ultimate Hits International version of the game, released in Japan, also contains an Easy mode option.9

Battle system

The Final Fantasy XIII battle system, with the Paradigm Shift option, the Active Time Battle ATB bar filling beneath it with five slots and two actions queued, and the three active characters health and roles displayed. The enemys name and damage percentage are shown in the upper right corner.
As in Final Fantasy XII, enemies are integrated into the open field and can be approached or avoided by the player. When the players character touches an enemy, the screen transitions from the regular map to a separate battle screen similar to those used in previous Final Fantasy titles.10 A maximum of three characters may be used in battles, which use a variant on the series traditional Active Time Battle ATB system first featured in Final Fantasy IV. Under this system, the player selects an action from the menus, such as Attack, Magic, and Item. Unlike previous games in the series, the player only controls the lead character while the remaining two characters are controlled by the games artificial intelligence AI. Each action requires a specific number of slots on the ATB bar, which continually refills to a set maximum number of slots. The ATB bar gradually increases in size throughout the game from two slots to six.11 The player may select less than the maximum number of possible actions, or may stop the filling of the ATB bar and perform as many actions as can be done with the current ATB amount. The player may select an autobattle command, which fills the ATB slots with actions chosen automatically. Actions cannot be performed outside of battle, and the characters health is fully restored after each battle.11

Each enemy has a meter, called a chain counter, consisting of a percentage starting at 100 which increases when the enemy is struck by attacks or spells. Attacks by different roles have different effects; some raise the chain by a larger amount while others give the player longer before the chain counter resets. The amount of damage performed by an attack is multiplied by the chain percentage before it is applied to the enemy. When the chain counter reaches a preset amount, different for each enemy, the enemy is placed into Stagger State. In this mode, the enemy has lowered defense and may be launched into the air.12 The Paradigm system allows the player to program six different roles which the characters can then assume to perform certain formations in battle in response to the specific conditions. The roles consist of Commando, a warriortype role; Ravager, a black magetype role which uses damagedealing magic; Medic, a White Magetype role which can heal and remove negative status ailments; Saboteur, which uses magic to weaken enemies by inflicting negative statuses; Synergist, which uses magic to strengthen allies by giving positive statuses; and Sentinel, which has protective and defensive abilities similar to a paladin.13 Each of the characters can initially take on only three roles, but the player has access to all of them later in the game although the other three roles are limited in their abilities for those players which choose them. The player can select which roles the controlled character and the AI characters are using both outside and during battle, which is the only way that the player can control the AI characters during battle.13 The player can only choose from specific sets of paradigms that the player has set up beforehand outside of battle.12

Each character can summon a specific Eidolon into battle.11 These summoned creatures include series staples Odin, Shiva, Alexander, and Bahamut, and newcomers Hecatoncheir and Brynhildr.14 When summoned, the Eidolon stays in combat while the characters accompanying the summoner leave the party.15 While an Eidolon is summoned, the player can trigger a feature called Gestalt Mode, in which the Eidolon transforms into a different form and performs different attacks while the summoning character rides them.16

Crystarium
The Crystarium is a leveling system consisting of six crystals and resembles the Sphere Grid from Final Fantasy X.1718 Each crystal in the Crystarium represents one of the six Paradigms, and is divided into ten levels. Each level contains various nodes that supply bonuses to health, strength, or magic, or provide new abilities and accessory slots. These nodes are connected by a semilinear path. The player may advance down the path by acquiring Crystarium Points, which are awarded after defeating enemies.19 The full Crystarium is not available to the player at the beginning of the game; at specific points in the games plot, the player gains access to new crystals or levels.20

Synopsis
Setting
Final Fantasy XIII is set on the world of Gran Pulse often simply called Pulse. Central to the story is Cocoon, a massive artificial sphere that floats above Pulses surface and is ruled by the Sanctum, a theocratic government. The two worlds are controlled by falCie flsi, mechanical beings with godlike power. The Cocoon falCie are responsible for keeping Cocoon floating, as well as providing light and water to the people that live inside. Each falCie handles a specific task.21 The falCie have the capability of marking the humans that live in Pulse and Cocoon as their servants. These servants, called lCie lsi, are branded with a symbol representing either Pulse or Cocoon and are given a Focusa task to complete.22 If the lCie complete their task in time, they are transformed to crystal and according to legend gain eternal life; otherwise they become mindless monsters called Cieth si.23 The lCie are not explicitly told their Focus, but are instead given visions that they must interpret.24

Several hundred years before the events of the game, a battle known as the War of Transgression took place between Pulse and Cocoon. During the battle, lCie from Pulse attacked and ripped a large hole in Cocoon.25 Eventually, the lCie completed their focus and were turned to crystal. The hole was patched with material lifted from Pulse, and Cocoons citizens have since lived in fear of another invasion; this fear is used by the Sanctum to remain in power.26 The Sanctum oversees two military branches: the Guardian Corps, responsible for keeping order on Cocoon, and the Public Security and Intelligence COMmand PSICOM, the special forces in charge of dealing with any threat related to Pulse.27 The falCie have given the humans advanced technology, including flying airships and mechanical creatures, and a form of magic also exists. This magic is normally only accessible to lCie, falCie, and various monsters in Cocoon and Pulse, though distilled chemical forms can be used by normal humans through the use of Manadrives.28

Characters
Main article: Characters of the Final Fantasy XIII series
The six main playable characters of Final Fantasy XIII are Lightning, the main protagonist of the game, a former soldier and older sister to Serah;2930 Snow Villiers, Serahs fianc and leader of NORA, a paramilitary group;31 Oerba Dia Vanille, the games narrator and an exile who is later revealed to be a lCie from Pulse;32 Sazh Katzroy, a civilian pilot and father to a young boy, Dajh; Hope Estheim, a young boy who is struggling within the relationships he shares with his parents;33 and Oerba Yun Fang, a lCie from Pulse who is working with the Sanctums Cavalry branch.34 Other characters include Galenth Dysley, the ruler of the Sanctum and main antagonist;35 Cid Raines, a Sanctum Brigadier General in the Cavalry who does not trust the government;14 and Serah Farron, Lightnings younger sister and Snows fiance.30

Plot

The playable cast of Final Fantasy XIII. From left to right: Sazh Katzroy, Snow Villiers, Hope Estheim, Lightning, Oerba Yun Fang, and Oerba Dia Vanille
In Cocoon, the citizens of the town of Bodhum are being evicted, or Purged, after coming in contact with something from Pulse.36 Over the course of the game, the player is shown flashbacks of the events of the previous thirteen days, which began when a falCie from Pulse was discovered near Bodhum. Lightnings sister Serah had found the falCie from Pulse and been changed into a lCie by it. Lightning and Sazh derail a Purge train bound for Pulse in an attempt to save Serah. As Snow leads his resistance group NORA to rescue the Purge exiles, several of them are killed. Heading to the falCie Anima to save Serah, Snow is joined by two of the exiles: Hope and Vanille. The two parties meet at the falCie, and find Serah just as she turns to crystal. Anima then brands them as lCie and they are cast out into a different part of Cocoon. During this transformation, the newly crested lCie all have the same vision: a monster called Ragnarok.37 Arguing over the ambiguous nature of the dreamed Focus, the party finds Serah in her crystallized form; Snow remains with her as the others leave.

Snow meets Cid and Fang, two members of the Cavalry, after he is captured and detained aboard the airship Lindblum. Meanwhile, the others flee from PSICOM before getting separated by an airstrike; Hope and Lightning travel to Palumpolum, while Sazh and Vanille travel to Nautilus. In Lightnings scenario, she unintentionally supports Hopes goal of killing Snow to avenge his mothers death.38 In Vanilles scenario, Sazh discusses how his son Dajh was turned into a lCie by a Cocoon falCie and was taken by PSICOM to discover his Focus.39 In Palumpolum, Lightning attempts to dissuade Hope from going through with his revenge and meets Snow and Fang. Fang reveals that she and Vanille were lCie from Pulse who were turned into crystals; they were turned back into humans 13 days earlier, sparking the Purge.40 Hope attempts to murder Snow, but after being rescued during an airstrike, he decides not to go through with it.41 The four then flee the city with Cids aid. In Nautilus, Vanille reveals herself to Sazh as a lCie from Pulse, and indirectly the reason that Dajh was turned into a lCie.32 Sazh and Vanille are then captured and detained on board the airship Palamecia.

On the Palamecia, the other members of the party reunite with Vanille and Sazh before they confront Galenth Dysley, the Sanctums Primarch, who is the Cocoon falCie ruler Barthandelus in disguise.42 Barthandelus tells the party that their Focus is to transform into the beast Ragnarok and slay the sleeping falCie Orphan, who keeps Cocoon afloat above Pulse. Slaying Orphan will result in the destruction of Cocoon. The party flees and learns from Cid that the falCie believe that Cocoons destruction will summon the Maker, the creator of the worlds. The falCie cannot harm Orphan themselves.43 Vanille and Fang reveal to the party that they were involved in the War of Transgression centuries earlier, and that their Focus then had been the same: to transform into Ragnarok and attempt to destroy Orphan.44 The party flies away to Pulse and journeys to Oerba, Vanille and Fangs hometown, where they hope to learn how to remove their lCie marks. The town is deserted, and they find no living people on the surface. The party is unsuccessful in removing their marks, and Barthandelus confronts them again. The party learns that Barthandelus has made Cid the new Primarch to create chaos in Cocoon to force the Cavalry to attack Cid and Orphan in a coup dtat.45

The party infiltrates Cocoon and heads towards Orphan but soon discover that the Cavalry have been turned into Cieth. The party defeats Barthandelus, but Orphan awakens and merges with Barthandelus, then compels Fang to finish her Focus as Ragnarok while the others are seemingly transformed into Cieth. The party reappears in human form, preventing Fang from transforming. The party defeats Orphan46 and escapes Cocoon, which is now falling towards Pulse. As the rest of the party turns to crystal for completing their Focus, Vanille and Fang remain on Cocoon and transform into Ragnarok together to prevent a collision between Cocoon and Pulse. The rest of the party awaken from their crystallization on Pulse and find their lCie brands gone; Lightning, Hope, Snow and Sazh reunite with Serah and Dajh.

Development

Director and scenario designer Motomu Toriyama at the 2010 Game Developers Conference
Development of Final Fantasy XIII began in February 2004, shortly after the release of Final Fantasy X2 International  Last Mission in Japan.47 At the time, the project was internally referred to by the codename Colors World.48 Over the first year, director Motomu Toriyama and scenario conceptor Kazushige Nojima conceived ideas for the plot. Nojima thought up the crystal mythology that became the basis for the Fabula Nova Crystallis series, including concepts such as the falCie and lCie. Toriyama then created a story premised on this mythology. He wanted to portray characters at the mercy of a predetermined, unjust fate who belong together but collide heavily. In order to achieve this, each of the storys thirteen chapters was made to focus on different protagonists. Chapters seven and eight were to mark a turning point in the interpersonal relationships of the party.49

In March 2006, when the structural part of the narrative started to come together, lead scenario writer Daisuke Watanabe joined the team. Toriyama gave him a rough outline of the first eight chapters, which included several cornerstone scenes that needed to be kept, like when party members were separated or reunited. He told Watanabe what he wanted to express with the scenario, and asked him to flesh out the story and to strengthen how the points in his outline connected.49 For example, Toriyamas rudimentary instructions in the document would say Snow and Hope reconcile.4950 Watanabe had to decide about how the scenes with this reconciliation would play out, then write the scenario that way. To emphasize what the story tried to express, Watanabe adjusted the personalities Toriyama had given to each character. For example, he felt that the party should not have a reliable and calm leader type at the beginning of the story, in order to more accurately show the confusion and unease after the protagonists transform into lCie. Toriyama has said that one of the storytelling challenges was the despair of the characters and the many points at which they are seemingly cornered. He mentioned the scene where Sazh tries to commit suicide as one such example: Although Toriyama felt it was almost a little too dark, he wanted to include something like it in the game. In contrast, he said that lighthearted elements such as Sazhs Chocobo chick helped maintain a good balance.49

At the beginning of the development, the game was intended to be released on the PlayStation 2.51 In May 2005, however, after the positive reception of the tech demo of Final Fantasy VII, the team decided to move the game to the PlayStation 3 and developed it with the new Crystal Tools engine, a seventh generation multiplatform game engine created by Square Enix for its next generation games.5253 Square Enix believed that developing a new engine would speed up development time later in the project, though it would initially cause a delay in the games development. However, the delay was longer than originally anticipated as the engine had to accommodate the requirements of several other games in addition to XIII.54 Another factor in the platform move was the delayed release of Final Fantasy XII, which came out a very short time before the release of the PlayStation 3.55 A PC port was considered during development, but was decided against due to how Square Enix saw the video game market situation at the time as well as additional complexities that Square Enix did not have experience with related to the PC platform, such as security issues.56 Final Fantasy XIII was first shown at the 2006 E3 convention.57 The trailer shown was an artistic concept that did not represent the final concept for the game, since at the time there was no playable form of the game.54 Announced alongside the game was Final Fantasy Versus XIII, later retitled as Final Fantasy XV, and the PlayStation Portable game Final Fantasy Type0, originally titled Final Fantasy Agito XIII, the three of which form the Fabula Nova Crystallis Final Fantasy series.58 Square Enix explained that although all three games are thematically linked, they are not directly related in terms of story.59

The developers for Final Fantasy XIII were divided into multiple areas, with each developer or team focusing only on a specific task such as developing a specific ingame area or modeling characters.54 Each physical area of the game was developed separately; after an initial design was approved, teams were assigned to a specific location and filled in details without reusing assets from other areas.60 Several of the games developers had worked on previous installments of the series. Director Motomu Toriyama had worked on Final Fantasy X and X2; producer Yoshinori Kitase had worked on V through VIII and as the producer for X and X2; maincharacter designer Tetsuya Nomura had performed the same role for VII, VIII, X, and X2, and battlesystem director Toshiro Tsuchida reprised that role from Final Fantasy X.6162 As XIII was the first Final Fantasy game for the PlayStation 3, the development teams internal goal was for the game to have the same gameplay and craftmanship impact that Final Fantasy VII and X had as the first games of the series on their respective consoles. They aimed to sell five million copies of the game.54 Toriyama wanted the game to be the ultimate single player RPG.63

Tsuchidas concept for the battle system was to maintain the strategic nature of commandbased battles. The system stemmed from a desire to create battles similar to those found in the film Final Fantasy VII: Advent Children.64 Magic points MP, which had been a part of the battle system in previous Final Fantasy titles, were removed in the games battle system as Tsuchida and the other designers felt that it gave players an incentive to not use their most powerful magic attacks due to the MP cost, in turn making battles less interesting. The Paradigm system was designed early in the battle systems development, with the intent of making battles rely on quickly changing strategies and feel fastmoving. Originally there were only five roles, but the Saboteur was later added as the designers felt that its abilities were missing from the game and did not fit with the other roles. Together with the maximum of three characters in a combat situation, the groupings of enemies were designed to force the player to switch Paradigms to keep them engaged in the battles.65

Toriyama wanted Lightning to be a new type of female character with an athletes body and a less feminine nature than some of the previous female characters of the series.5166 His guideline to Nomura was to make her strong and beautiful, and she was intended to be reminiscent of Final Fantasy VIIs Cloud Strife.5167 Fang was initially meant to be a male character, but the gender was changed to coincide with the updated character designs during the latter part of development.68 The graphics capabilities of the PS3 and Xbox 360 compared to previous consoles allowed Nomura to use more complex elements in the character designs than before, such as Lightnings cape and detailed facial features.69 This in turn meant that the art team had to do much more work for each character or area than in previous games.70 Nomura did not take an involved role in the creation of the nonplayable characters.69

Unlike previous games in the series which were more inspired by Asian locations and culture, Final Fantasy XIII was intended by the art team to be reminiscent of the United States. Pulse was based on landscape photographs the team took from across the country, and Cocoon was intended to be a melting pot of different ethnicities.70 The setting was also given a science fiction aesthetic to make it stand out more in comparison with other entries in the series.71 Art director Isamu Kamikokuryo revealed that many additional scenarios such as Lightnings home, which were functioning in an unreleased build during development, were left out of the final version due to concerns about the games length and volume.72 Kamikokuryo said the content they cut was, in itself, enough to make another game.72 According to Toriyama, the cuts were made in various stages of the games development, and that some of the content was removed just before the games completion.63 The game, unlike previous titles in the series, includes no explorable town areas; Toriyama said in an interview that the team was unable to make them as graphically appealing as the rest of the game and chose to eliminate them.47 Toriyama intended to have a piece of downloadable content available for the game that would include a new area, weapons and quests, but was forced to cut it as well due to quality concerns so late in the project and difficulties with the different systems for extra content on the two gaming consoles.73

A playable demo of Final Fantasy XIII was included in the Japanese version of Final Fantasy VII Advent Children Complete, released on April 16, 2009.7475 Toriyama stated that the release of the demo, which was not in the original development schedule, helped the team recognize a shared vision for what the game should look and feel like, a problem which had been plaguing the development team up until then. It helped the team prioritize the work that still needed to be done, which increased the development speed for the remainder of the project. The game was intended to appeal to both Western and Japanese audiences, and focus groups from both regions were used. The English localization began while development was still in progress to lessen the delay between the Japanese and worldwide releases.5476 The game was initially going to be released solely for the PlayStation 3, but an Xbox 360 version was announced late in the games development cycle. The Xbox version, due to technical limitations, runs at a lower resolution 720p maximum than the PlayStation version and is spread across 3 discs.77

Music
Main article: Music of Final Fantasy XIII
Masashi Hamauzu composed the games soundtrack; his previous work on the series was as a cocomposer for Final Fantasy X and as the main composer for Dirge of Cerberus: Final Fantasy VII.61 The game was the first mainseries Final Fantasy game to not include any compositions by original series composer Nobuo Uematsu. Although Uematsu was originally announced to compose the main theme of the game, this role was taken over by Hamauzu after Uematsu signed on to compose the soundtrack to Final Fantasy XIV. The score features some pieces orchestrated by Yoshihisa Hirano, Toshiyuki Oomori, and Kunihito Shiina, with the Warsaw Philharmonic Orchestra.7879 The song My Hands, from British singer Leona Lewis second album Echo, was chosen to replace Final Fantasy XIIIs original theme song, Kimi ga Iru Kara by Sayuri Sugawara, for the games international release.80 Square Enix president Yoichi Wada later said that it would have been better if the American branch of the company had produced a theme song from scratch, but a lack of staff led to the decision of licensing an existing song.81

Music from the game has been released in several albums. Square Enix released the main soundtrack album, Final Fantasy XIII Original Soundtrack, on four Compact Discs in 2010.82 The album sold 16,000 copies the day of its release.83 Square Enix released selections from the soundtrack on two gramophone record albums in 2010: WF: Music from Final Fantasy XIII and WF: Music from Final Fantasy XIII Gentle Reveries.8485 An album of arranged pieces from the soundtrack, Final Fantasy XIII Original Soundtrack PLUS, was also released by Square Enix in 2010, as was an album of piano arrangements.8687 For Life Music published a single of the theme song for the Japanese version of the game, Kimi ga Iru Kara , Because Youre Here, in 2009.88

Versions and merchandise

Art director Isamu Kamikokuryo left and producer Yoshinori Kitase right at the Final Fantasy XIII London Launch Event at HMV in March 2010, which was hosted by Alex Zane holding microphone.
The game was released in Japan on December 17, 2009, and in North America, Europe and Australia on March 9, 2010. Alongside the release of the game in Japan, Japanese alcoholic beverage distributor Suntory released the Final Fantasy XIII Elixir to promote the game.89 On the same day, a Final Fantasy XIII PlayStation Home personal space was made available for free in Japan until January 13, 2010, along with a costume and personal space furnishings;90 they were released to the Asian, European, and North American versions of PlayStation Home on March 11, 2010.91 On December 18, 2012, the game was rereleased as part of the Final Fantasy 25th Anniversary Ultimate Box Japanese package.92 It was rereleased again on November 21, 2013, as part of the Lightning Ultimate box, a Japan exclusive edition which includes Final Fantasy XIII and its two sequels.93

The game was released bundled with consoles in different regions. The game was bundled in Japan with a limitededition white PlayStation 3 with a pink color print of Lightning on the surface of the console,94 and with an Xbox 360 with the silver strip on the hard drive emblazoned with the Final Fantasy XIII logo in the western release. A limited quantity of themed Xbox faceplates created by Nomura were made available through a select few retailers in Europe, North America, and Australia. PAL territories received a limited collectors edition of the game for both Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3, with the Final Fantasy XIII Original Sound Selection best of soundtrack CD, three Eidolon art prints, a Brand of the lCie decal and The World of Final Fantasy XIII, a hardback book featuring character artwork, CGrendered artwork, and environments from across the game production.95 Square Enix published three Ultimania books: the Final Fantasy XIII Scenario Ultimania and the Final Fantasy XIII Battle Ultimania on January 28, 2010, and the Final Fantasy XIII Ultimania  on September 30, 2010.96 The Battle Ultimania provides a description and analysis of the new battle system and its components, and developer interviews.97 The Scenario Ultimania describes the main scenarios in the game, profiles on the characters and areas in Cocoon and Gran Pulse, developer interviews, and details on each location.98 The last guide, the Ultimania , includes voice actor and additional staff interviews, the complete story of Final Fantasy XIII including additional character profiles, a collection of artworks and illustrations, and additional dissections of the story and background.99

While the game was released on both PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 in western regions, the game was a PlayStation 3 exclusive in Asian territories.100 This was changed in late 2010 when Square Enix announced that the Xbox 360 version would in fact release in Japan, despite many statements to the opposite.101 It was later released for Microsoft Windows via Steam, along with its two sequels.1 Final Fantasy XIII was the first game in the series to receive an official release in Chinese and Korean.102 This was the first edition of a Final Fantasy game in which Japanese voiceovers could be enabled. An international version of the game for the Xbox 360 called Final Fantasy XIII Ultimate Hits International was released in Asia on December 16, 2010.103 The game includes an Easy mode option, and features the English voices. It comes with a bonus booklet titled Final Fantasy XIII Corridor of Memory that contains content that was previously left out of the original version of the game and a short story epilogue titled Final Fantasy XIII Episode I.9

Final Fantasy XIII was released for iOS and Android devices via cloud streaming in Japan on April 10, 2015.

Reception
Reception
Aggregate score
AggregatorScore
MetacriticPS3: 83100104
X360: 82100105
PC: 65100106
Review scores
PublicationScore
1UP.comA107
CVG9.210108
Edge510109
Eurogamer81013
Famitsu3940110
Game Informer9.2510111
GameSpot8.510112
GameSpy4.55113
IGN8.910114
OPM UK910115
Play7.910116
Final Fantasy XIII sold over one million units on its first day of sale in Japan,117 and had sold 1.7 million copies for the PlayStation 3 in Japan by the end of 2009, and 1.9 million by the end of 2010.118119 Square Enix had anticipated high initial sales for the game and shipped close to two million units for its launch.120 The game sold more than one million copies in North America in its release month. In March 2010, Square Enix stated that Final Fantasy XIII was the fastestselling title in the franchises history.121 By April of the same year, American game sales for the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 reached an estimated 800,000 and 500,000 units respectively.122 As of January 2013, the game had sold 6.6 million copies worldwide.123 According to Media Create, female gamers accounted for nearly a third of the games Japanese fanbase.124 The Steam version has sold over 600,000 copies as of July 2016.125 As of July 2012, a combined total of 9.7 million units has been sold on consoles for both Final Fantasy XIII and its sequel Final Fantasy XIII2.123 In September 2014, Square Enix announced the Final Fantasy XIII series has been widely successful and has shipped over 11 million copies worldwide.126 As of 2017, the game has sold over 7 million copies worldwide.2

Final Fantasy XIII received generally positive reviews. Review aggregator website Metacritic gave the PlayStation 3 version 83100 based on 83 reviews,104 the Xbox 360 version 82100 based on 54 reviews,105 and the Microsoft Windows version 65100 based on 6 reviews.106 It was rated 39 out of 40 by the Japanese gaming magazine Famitsu.110 Dengeki praised the game for the battle system, stating that the battles are by far the most exciting in the series, and concluded Final Fantasy XIII deserved a score of 120, as 100 would not be enough.127 The game was voted as the second best game of 2009 in Dengeki Onlines reader poll,128 and in January 2010, it was voted the best game ever in Famitsus reader poll.129 The game received a Best RPG of the year award nomination at the Spike Video Game Awards, but lost to Mass Effect 2.130 It won the Future Division award at the Japan Game Awards 2009 and later won a Game Designers Award at the Japan Game Awards 2010.131

Universal praise was given to the technical milestones achieved by the games graphics and presentation. Edge felt that Cocoon in particular was an inspired setting ... blessed with a vibrancy and vivid colour that often leaves you openmouthed.109 GameSpot called the art design magnificent.112 Further praise was given to the prerendered animation sequences108132133 and the almost seamless transition of visual quality between these and the realtime gameplay.132 Many also appreciated the games soundtrack,108112 with Masashi Hamauzu providing a score with catchy hooks and bloodpumping battle melodies, according to Wired.133

The battle system of Final Fantasy XIII received widespread praise. The increased pace of battles was appreciated, with several reviews describing it as thrilling;13108 Edges description of the battle system summarized it as among the genres finest.109 1UP.com said that Despite the fact that twothirds of your party is AIcontrolled, FFXIIIs battles may be the most involving the series has ever seen.107 The story got a mixed reception, with Wired remarking that the plot was a little more human and less esoteric than in previous games.133 1UP.com felt that the story was hardly worldclass writing, but that the writers clearly knew the medium well and had attempted to avoid clichs.107 Reviewers felt that the characters worked well together,107112 and that the interactions among them as the game progressed made up for shortcomings in the story.13

Linearity
While critics generally praised Square Enixs attempt to revitalize the Final Fantasy series formula, many reacted negatively to the linear nature of the game, especially in the first ten chapters on Cocoon,107134 an issue which many felt was compounded by the large reduction of towns, freeroaming capabilities, and interaction with nonplayer characters.135 GamePro described the gameplay as a long hallway toward an orange target symbol on your minimap that triggers a cutscene, a boss fight, or both,135 and 1UP.com criticized the linear aspect as the games biggest shortcoming, and felt the first section was superficial.107 Edge and others awarded the game especially lower scores as a result of these aspects, with Edge in particular lowering the score they awarded the game to a five out of ten primarily due to the games linear nature.109

In contrast, reviewers from GamesRadar and Computer and Video Games appreciated the linear nature; the former stated that the streamlined, focused structure eliminates potential tedium without dumbing anything down,12 while the latter felt it was a clever move,108 and kept the player from being bogged down with mundane number crunching, and finicky and repetitive levelingup.108 Many negatively noted the gradual unfurling of the players abilities over this first part of the game, from battle gameplay to selecting the party leader.13107 Combined with the games linear nature, some reviews went as far as to describe these chapters as boring until the world of Gran Pulse was revealed.109133134 Edge noted that while it did not do enough to make up for the opening chapters, at Gran Pulse the game hits a sweet spot as the narrative offers hunting sidequests and the simple joy of exploring to see what visual marvel is around the next corner.109

Response to criticism
After release, director Motomu Toriyama felt that the lowerthanexpected review scores for a main Final Fantasy series game came from reviewers who approached the game from a Western point of view. These reviewers were used to games in which the player was given an open world to explore, he said, noting that this expectation contrasted with the vision the team set out to create. He noted that it becomes very difficult to tell a compelling story when youre given that much freedom.136 Yoshinori Kitase stated that they didnt really intend to work within the RPG template, but wanted to create a new game, even a new genre. He stated that in a lot of senses FFXIII is more like an FPS than an RPG.137

Toriyama and Kitase later said, in July 2011, that the biggest complaints about the game were that it was too linear and that there was not enough interaction between the player and the world, which they described as a lack of towns and minigames compared to the previous Final Fantasy games. They also named the amount of time it took to access all of the gameplay elements as a common criticism, saying that people interpreted it as a lengthy tutorial.138

Yoichi Wada, thenpresident of Square Enix, made his thoughts about the reception of the game known to Gamasutra. He said some value it highly and some are not very happy with it.139 He added, Should Final Fantasy become a new type of game or should Final Fantasy not become a new type of game? The customers have different opinions. Its very difficult to determine which way it should go.139

Windows port
Square Enix released a Microsoft Windows port of the game in October 2014, where it was met with a more critical reception than the original versions. PC Gamers Samuel Roberts, when reviewing the port, criticized not only the original gameplay, but heavily criticized the quality of the port itself, decrying the low resolution, limited graphical options and low framerate. He was especially critical of the time taken for the port given that an unofficial patch was produced by modder Peter Thoman within a day of release that fixed many of the issues.140 Michael McWhertor of Polygon also noted a similar critical response by consumers.141 A patch was released by Square Enix in December 2014, which was noted by Thoman as adding only the graphical features that his external patch had, with no other additions or performance improvements.142

Sequels
Main articles: Final Fantasy XIII2 and Lightning Returns: Final Fantasy XIII
At the Square Enix First Production Department Conference held on January 18, 2011, Square Enix announced that they were developing a direct sequel to Final Fantasy XIII, entitled Final Fantasy XIII2, which they intended to build on the games story and characters while taking on board the criticism and other feedback about the original. It was released on December 15, 2011, in Japan, January 31, 2012, in North America and February 3, 2012, in Europe, for both the PlayStation 3 and the Xbox 360.143144 Motomu Toriyama and Yoshinori Kitase returned to their respective roles as director and producer. The game begins three years after the events of Final Fantasy XIII, and features Serah and newcomer Noel as the main protagonists. XIII2 is the fifth sequel game in the Final Fantasy series, after Final Fantasy X2, Dirge of Cerberus: Final Fantasy VII, Final Fantasy XII: Revenant Wings, and Final Fantasy IV: The After Years. Most of the team returned again to create a second sequel entitled Lightning Returns: Final Fantasy XIII, meant to wrap up the story of Lightning and the Final Fantasy XIII universe.145 The game was released in November 2013 in Japan and in February 2014 in North America and Europe.146 Toriyama stated in the Ultimania Omega companion book prior to XIII2s announcement that he hoped to write a story where Lightning ends up happy, though at the time Square Enix had no plans to make a sequel.73

Notes
 XIII Fainaru Fantaj Stn in Japanese
References
 Shreier, Jason September 18, 2014. Final Fantasy XIII Is Coming To PC. Kotaku. Gawker Media. Archived from the original on September 18, 2014. Retrieved September 18, 2014.
 1 PS3: 5M, Xbox 360: 2M IGN Japan
 Goldfarb, Andrew September 11, 2012. Lightning Returns Will Be the Last Final Fantasy XIII. IGN. Archived from the original on September 12, 2012. Retrieved November 19, 2012.
 FINAL FANTASY XIII SERIES ANNOUNCED FOR WINDOWS PC. Square Enix. September 18, 2014.
 Square Enix, ed. 2010. Final Fantasy XIII North American instruction manual. Square Enix. p. 10.
 Square Enix, ed. 2010. Final Fantasy XIII North American instruction manual. Square Enix. p. 16.
 Square Enix, ed. 2010. Final Fantasy XIII North American instruction manual. Square Enix. p. 19.
 Square Enix, ed. 2010. Final Fantasy XIII North American instruction manual. Square Enix. p. 12.
 Cullen, Johnny September 8, 2010. No reason to bring FFXIII 360 International Edition west, says Square Enix. VG247. Archived from the original on December 3, 2010. Retrieved August 2, 2011.
 Final Fantasy XIII for PlayStation 3 system. Square Enix. Archived from the original on August 5, 2008. Retrieved October 10, 2008.
 Final Fantasy XIII Update. IGN. News Corporation. April 8, 2009. Archived from the original on April 13, 2009. Retrieved January 4, 2011.
 Gudmundson, Carolyn March 4, 2010. Final Fantasy XIII Review. GamesRadar. Archived from the original on July 1, 2010. Retrieved June 30, 2010.
 Welsh, Oli March 5, 2010. Final Fantasy XIII. Eurogamer. Archived from the original on May 7, 2011. Retrieved June 30, 2010.
 Final Fantasy XIII Official Website. Square Enix. Archived from the original on March 26, 2010. Retrieved January 4, 2011.
 Clements, Ryan June 2, 2009. Final Fantasy XIII Preview. IGN. News Corporation. Archived from the original on June 11, 2009. Retrieved July 16, 2009.
 Lee, Garnett August 20, 2009. Final Fantasy XIII Preview. 1UP.com. Ziff Davis. Archived from the original on May 7, 2011. Retrieved September 8, 2009.
 Pigna, Kris November 1, 2009. Final Fantasy XIII Character Growth System Explained. 1UP.com. Ziff Davis. Archived from the original on May 7, 2011. Retrieved November 1, 2009.
 Piggyback Interactive, ed. 2010. Final Fantasy XIII The Complete Official Guide. Piggyback Interactive. p. 154. ISBN 9780307468376.
 Square Enix, ed. 2010. Final Fantasy XIII North American instruction manual. Square Enix. pp. 3637.
 Bramwell, Tom November 12, 2009. FFXIIIs Crystarium system detailed. Eurogamer. Archived from the original on May 7, 2011. Retrieved December 23, 2010.
 Square Enix March 9, 2010. Final Fantasy XIII. PlayStation 3, Xbox 360. Square Enix. Datalog  Sanctum FalCie: The Sanctum falCie are the unfathomable entities that constructed the floating shell of Cocoon in ages past, and even now watch over the worlds human inhabitants. Each is assigned a specific task that supports the existence of Cocoons grateful populace, such as generating energy or manufacturing food.
 Final Fantasy XIII  E3 2008: MS Press Conference Cam Trailer. GameTrailers. July 14, 2008. Archived from the original on June 21, 2009. Retrieved October 10, 2008.
 Winkler, Chris July 16, 2009. New FFXIII Details Announced. RPGFan. Archived from the original on May 7, 2011. Retrieved September 8, 2009.
 Square Enix March 9, 2010. Final Fantasy XIII. PlayStation 3, Xbox 360. Square Enix. Datalog  Branded: ... they must now complete their assigned Focus if they are to avoid becoming monstrous Cieth, though none can say for sure what their mission actually entails. Their only clue is the vision ...
 Square Enix March 9, 2010. Final Fantasy XIII. PlayStation 3, Xbox 360. Square Enix. Datalog  The War of Transgression: Several hundred years ago, the armies of Pulse attempted to invade Cocoon in a conflict known today as the War of Transgression. The Sanctum falCie were able to repel the lowerworld forces before they breached Cocoons interior, but not before they managed to seriously damage areas lying near the worlds outer rim.
 Square Enix March 9, 2010. Final Fantasy XIII. PlayStation 3, Xbox 360. Square Enix. Datalog  Lowerworld Artifacts: In the aftermath of the War of Transgression, regions near Cocoons outer rim were left uninhabitable due to the severe trauma they had sustained. To undo the damage, the falCie gathered materials from the surface of Pulse and rebuilt Cocoons wounded landscape with them.
 Square Enix March 9, 2010. Final Fantasy XIII. PlayStation 3, Xbox 360. Square Enix. Datalog  PSICOM: The Sanctum military is composed of two main branches: the Guardian Corps, responsible for maintaining security in various jurisdictions throughout Cocoon, and PSICOM Public Security and Intelligence Command. PSICOM is an elite special operations unit charged with protecting Cocoon from Pulsian incursion.
 Square Enix March 9, 2010. Final Fantasy XIII. PlayStation 3, Xbox 360. Square Enix. Datalog  AMP Technology: Humans ordinarily lack the means to wield magic, but through the use of manadrives... it is possible to synthesize the effects.
 Square Enix March 9, 2010. Final Fantasy XIII. PlayStation 3, Xbox 360. Square Enix. Datalog  Lightning: Lightning was formerly a sergeant in the Guardian Corps, Bodhum Security Regiment.
 Square Enix March 9, 2010. Final Fantasy XIII. PlayStation 3, Xbox 360. Square Enix. Datalog  Serah Farron: Serah is Lightnings younger sister and Snows fiancee. Also a Pulse lCie, she has gained eternal life and slumbers in crystal stasis. ... her task was simply to gather the tools for Cocoons destruction.
 Square Enix March 9, 2010. Final Fantasy XIII. PlayStation 3, Xbox 360. Square Enix. Datalog  Snow Villiers: Snow... leads the rebellious group of youths known as NORA.
 Square Enix March 9, 2010. Final Fantasy XIII. PlayStation 3, Xbox 360. Square Enix. Vanille: My name is Oerba Dia Vanille. I am a lCie from Gran Pulse. And to everyone on Cocoon... ...evil.
 Square Enix March 9, 2010. Final Fantasy XIII. PlayStation 3, Xbox 360. Square Enix. Datalog  Nora Estheim: Nora is Hopes mother. Worried about the worsening relationship between her son and his father, Nora wonders how to break down the barriers Hope has created.
 Square Enix March 9, 2010. Final Fantasy XIII. PlayStation 3, Xbox 360. Square Enix. Datalog  Cold, Hard Fact: ...the Widearea Response Brigade, otherwise known as the Cavalry. ...the woman who works with them...a Pulse lCie
 Square Enix March 9, 2010. Final Fantasy XIII. PlayStation 3, Xbox 360. Square Enix. Datalog  The Sanctum: ...falCie opt to participate only superficially in governmental affairs, leaving Cocoons administration entirely at the discretion of the human Sanctum and its Primarch, Galenth Dysley.
 Square Enix March 9, 2010. Final Fantasy XIII. PlayStation 3, Xbox 360. Square Enix. Datalog  The Purge: The recent discovery of a falCie from Pulse... caused widespread civil unrest. ...The Sanctum then announced its intent to forcibly relocate the affected to Pulse in an emergency measure dubbed by authorities as the Purge.
 Square Enix March 9, 2010. Final Fantasy XIII. PlayStation 3, Xbox 360. Square Enix. Datalog  Branded: The mark seared on their bodies... it is the brand of a cursed lCie. ...Their only clue is the vision they all witnessed of a great beast laying waste to Cocoon. Ragnarok.
 Square Enix March 9, 2010. Final Fantasy XIII. PlayStation 3, Xbox 360. Square Enix. Datalog  Operation Nora: Operation Nora... the means by which he will exact vengeance on Snow. ...Lightning soon realizes her mistake. Her lecture to abandon compassion was intended as a warning against the hesitation she fears will be his undoing.
 Square Enix March 9, 2010. Final Fantasy XIII. PlayStation 3, Xbox 360. Square Enix. Sazh: My son Dajh. He was picked. Hes a lCie. He said he wanted to see a falCie. So, I took him on a tour of the Euride Gorge plant. Thought I surprised him with a Chocobo chick to take home, but the second I turned my back... ...into the energy plant he went.
 Square Enix March 9, 2010. Final Fantasy XIII. PlayStation 3, Xbox 360. Square Enix. Fang: Ive got a few screws loose, but Im a lCie, same as you. Difference being... ...I wasnt born on Cocoon. Im from Gran Pulse. The world below you all hate so much. My partner and Id turn to crystal and gone to sleep. But when we came around, here we were. The reason Cocoons in such an uproar is the same reason that youre here now. Vanille and I woke up.
 Square Enix March 9, 2010. Final Fantasy XIII. PlayStation 3, Xbox 360. Square Enix. Datalog  Sustained by Hate: It is his hatred of Snow that has been sustaining him through countless battles. In a strange way, the man who made a promise to his mother has been protecting him all along. ...Operation Nora is over.
 Square Enix March 9, 2010. Final Fantasy XIII. PlayStation 3, Xbox 360. Square Enix. Dysley: Oh child, perish the thought. I am more than that! Barthandelus: I am falCie. My name is Barthandelus. Voice of the Sanctum, and LordSovereign of the Cocoon falCie.
 Square Enix March 9, 2010. Final Fantasy XIII. PlayStation 3, Xbox 360. Square Enix. Datalog  Orphan: As Sanctum falCie and lCie are incapable of harming Orphan, Barthandelus requires the assistance of Pulse lCie.
 Square Enix March 9, 2010. Final Fantasy XIII. PlayStation 3, Xbox 360. Square Enix. Datalog  Helping Hands: The lCie who became Ragnarok and attacked Cocoon during the war was... Fang herself.
 Square Enix March 9, 2010. Final Fantasy XIII. PlayStation 3, Xbox 360. Square Enix. Datalog  Start Your Engines: The Cavalry... confronts the new Primarch... Raines calmly awaits his own demise. Revived to serve as Barthandeluss pawn...
 Square Enix March 9, 2010. Final Fantasy XIII. PlayStation 3, Xbox 360. Square Enix. Lightning: Maybe Cocoon is past saving, but its our home. And well protect it, or die trying! We live to make the impossible possible! That is our Focus!
 Final Fantasy XIII Scenario Ultimania in Japanese. Tokyo: Studio Bentstuff. February 1, 2010. pp. 496499. ISBN 9784757527751.
 Sato November 4, 2013. The Final Fantasy XIII Project Was Originally Called Colors World. Siliconera. Archived from the original on November 5, 2013. Retrieved November 5, 2013.
 Final Fantasy XIII Scenario Ultimania in Japanese. Tokyo: Studio Bentstuff. February 1, 2010. pp. 388390. ISBN 9784757527751.
 XIII REMINISCENCE tracer of memories Final Fantasy XIII: Reminiscence tracer of memories: Interview with author Daisuke Watanabe. Famitsu. July 11, 2014. Archived from the original on July 11, 2014. Retrieved July 11, 2014.
 Smith, Luke June 7, 2006. FFXIII Interview: Nomura, Kitase, Hashimoto and Toriyama. 1UP.com. Ziff Davis. Archived from the original on May 7, 2011. Retrieved October 24, 2009.
 Gantayat, Anoop November 8, 2006. Final Fantasy XIII Update. IGN. News Corporation. Archived from the original on December 27, 2007. Retrieved November 10, 2006.
 Yip, Spencer December 31, 2009. Final Fantasy XIII: Behind The Textures. Siliconera. Archived from the original on May 4, 2010. Retrieved September 11, 2010.
 Toriyama, Motomu; Maeda, Akihiko October 2010. Post Mortem Final Fantasy XIII. Game Developer. 17 9: 2429. ISSN 1073922X.
 Jeremy Parish May 6, 2014. Where Final Fantasy Went Wrong, and How Square Enix is Putting It Right. USGamer. Archived from the original on May 8, 2014. Retrieved May 8, 2014.
 YinPoole, Wesley February 19, 2014. Square Enix definitely interested in bringing future Final Fantasy games to PC. Eurogamer. Archived from the original on February 19, 2014. Retrieved February 19, 2014.
 Sloderbeck, Matt May 6, 2006. Square Enix PreE3 Event Features New Games, New Details. RPGamer. Archived from the original on August 1, 2008. Retrieved October 10, 2008.
 Roper, Chris May 8, 2006. E3 2006: Final Fantasy XIII Official. IGN. News Corporation. Archived from the original on November 12, 2007. Retrieved May 8, 2006.
 Brudvig, Erik May 8, 2006. E3 2006: Eyeson Final Fantasy XIII Trailer. IGN. News Corporation. Archived from the original on October 15, 2007. Retrieved October 10, 2008.
 Final Fantasy XIII Battle Ultimania in Japanese. Tokyo: Studio Bentstuff. January 28, 2010. pp. 306308. ISBN 9784062043977.
 Gantayat, Anoop May 9, 2006. E3 2006: FFXIII Staff Check. IGN. News Corporation. Archived from the original on April 3, 2008. Retrieved December 15, 2008.
 Moses, Tenacious February 27, 2007. New details on Final Fantasy Versus XIII. GamePro. Archived from the original on March 25, 2009. Retrieved October 10, 2008.
 Yip, Spencer March 18, 2010. Final Fantasy XIII Director Answers Your FFXIII Questions. Silconera. Archived from the original on September 26, 2010. Retrieved September 11, 2010.
 Bramwell, Tom June 7, 2006. FF to look like Advent Children?. Eurogamer. Archived from the original on June 24, 2009. Retrieved July 27, 2008.
 Final Fantasy XIII Battle Ultimania in Japanese. Tokyo: Studio Bentstuff. January 28, 2010. pp. 528531. ISBN 9784062043977.
 Bettenhausen, Shane July 16, 2009. E3 2008: One More Final Fantasy XIII Interview. 1UP.com. Ziff Davis. Archived from the original on May 7, 2011. Retrieved October 25, 2009.
 1000. Famitsu in Japanese 1001: 4245. February 8, 2008.
 Tanaka, John October 21, 2009. Final Fantasy XIII Update. IGN. News Corporation. Archived from the original on May 7, 2011. Retrieved October 27, 2009.
 Final Fantasy XIII Scenario Ultimania in Japanese. Tokyo: Studio Bentstuff. February 1, 2010. pp. 5052. ISBN 9784757527751.
 Final Fantasy XIII Scenario Ultimania in Japanese. Tokyo: Studio Bentstuff. February 1, 2010. pp. 9698. ISBN 9784757527751.
 Gordon, Jon February 8, 2010. Exclusive Final Fantasy XIII Interview. Play. Archived from the original on July 18, 2013. Retrieved December 29, 2013.
 Yip, Spencer January 13, 2010. Noras Secret Base And Lightnings Home Cut From Final Fantasy XIII. Silconera. Archived from the original on June 6, 2010. Retrieved June 30, 2010.
 Final Fantasy XIII Ultimania Omega in Japanese. Tokyo: Studio Bentstuff. October 4, 2010. pp. 508511. ISBN 9784757529588.
 Dutka, Ben March 23, 2009. Advent Children BluRay Set For June In North America. PSXExtreme. Archived from the original on March 27, 2009. Retrieved March 29, 2009.
 Tanaka, John August 1, 2008. Final Fantasy XIII Demo Announced. IGN. News Corporation. Archived from the original on August 22, 2008. Retrieved October 10, 2008.
 Gordon, Jonathan August 20, 2009. GC 09 Final Fantasy XIII Interview. NowGamer. Archived from the original on May 7, 2011. Retrieved December 21, 2010.
 Leadbetter, Richard March 5, 2010. Digital Foundry: FaceOff: Final Fantasy XIII. Eurogamer. Archived from the original on May 8, 2011. Retrieved March 5, 2010.
 Greening, Chris September 30, 2009. Lots More Final Fantasy XIII Music Details. Square Enix Music Online. Archived from the original on May 7, 2011. Retrieved November 8, 2009.
 Final Fantasy XIII Original Soundtrack Information. Square Enix Music Online. September 30, 2009. Archived from the original on January 2, 2010. Retrieved November 8, 2009.
 Marfuggi, Antonio November 13, 2009. Final Fantasy XIII  The Time Has Come. Sony. Archived from the original on May 7, 2011. Retrieved April 15, 2010.
 French, Michael; Fear, Ed December 16, 2009. Final Countdown. Develop. Archived from the original on May 7, 2011. Retrieved January 11, 2010.
 Gann, Patrick February 12, 2010. Final Fantasy XIII OST. RPGFan. Archived from the original on May 7, 2011. Retrieved May 31, 2010.
 FF XIIITop3 in Japanese. Oricon. January 28, 2010. Archived from the original on May 7, 2011. Retrieved February 3, 2010.
 WFMusic from Final Fantasy XIII. Square Enix. Archived from the original on May 7, 2011. Retrieved May 31, 2010.
 WFMusic from Final Fantasy XIII Gentle Reveries. Square Enix. Archived from the original on May 7, 2011. Retrieved May 31, 2010.
 Final Fantasy XIII Original Soundtrack Plus. Square Enix Music Online. Archived from the original on May 7, 2011. Retrieved May 31, 2010.
 Greening, Chris July 21, 2010. Final Fantasy XIII Piano Collections. Square Enix Music Online. Archived from the original on May 7, 2011. Retrieved July 21, 2010.
 Gann, Patrick December 12, 2009. Sayuri Sugawara  Because Youre Here. RPGFan. Archived from the original on December 30, 2009. Retrieved May 31, 2010.
 Final Fantasy XIII Elixir in Japanese. Square Enix. September 8, 2009. Archived from the original on May 7, 2011. Retrieved September 29, 2009.
 Final Fantasy XIII in Japanese. Sony Computer Entertainment. January 13, 2010. Archived from the original on May 7, 2011. Retrieved June 30, 2010.
 Final Fantasy XIII Comes to PlayStation Home  Sodium Updates, Indiana Jones Items  a Huge Sale!. Sony Computer Entertainment. March 10, 2010. Archived from the original on October 7, 2010. Retrieved March 12, 2010.
 Gantayat, Anoop August 31, 2012. Full Final Fantasy 25th Anniversary Ultimate Box Game List. Andriasang. Archived from the original on September 21, 2013. Retrieved October 2, 2012.
 Spencer June 6, 2013. Japans Lightning Ultimate Box Has All Three Final Fantasy XIII Games. Siliconera. Archived from the original on September 20, 2013. Retrieved October 13, 2013.
 Clements, Ryan September 23, 2009. TGS 09: Final Fantasy XIII PS3 Bundle. IGN. News Corporation. Archived from the original on May 7, 2011. Retrieved January 4, 2011.
 Watts, Steve January 22, 2010. Square Announces PAL Final Fantasy XIII Collectors Edition. 1UP.com. Ziff Davis. Archived from the original on May 7, 2011. Retrieved February 1, 2011.
  eSTORE  in Japanese. Square Enix. Archived from the original on May 7, 2011. Retrieved February 1, 2011.
 Final Fantasy XIII Battle Ultimania in Japanese. Tokyo: Studio Bentstuff. January 28, 2010. ISBN 9784062043977.
 Final Fantasy XIII Scenario Ultimania in Japanese. Tokyo: Studio Bentstuff. February 1, 2010. ISBN 9784757527751.
 Final Fantasy XIII Ultimania Omega in Japanese. Tokyo: Studio Bentstuff. October 4, 2010. ISBN 9784757529588.
 Final Fantasy XIII here for PS3 only. AsiaOne. January 31, 2010. Archived from the original on February 2, 2010. Retrieved January 4, 2011.
 Ashcraft, Brian August 9, 2010. Japan Finally Getting Final Fantasy XIII On The Xbox 360. Kotaku. Gawker Media. Archived from the original on May 9, 2013. Retrieved March 24, 2014.
 PlayStation 3 Final Fantasy XIII  2010 5 in Chinese. Sony Computer Entertainment. February 5, 2010. Archived from the original on May 7, 2011. Retrieved February 6, 2010.
 Gantayat, Anoop September 8, 2010. Final Fantasy XIII Xbox 360 Confirmed For Japan. IGN. Archived from the original on May 7, 2011. Retrieved September 11, 2010.
 Final Fantasy XIII for PlayStation 3 Reviews. Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on May 7, 2011. Retrieved February 9, 2010.
 Final Fantasy XIII for Xbox 360 Reviews. Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on May 7, 2011. Retrieved February 9, 2010.
 Final Fantasy XIII for PC Reviews. Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on March 17, 2015. Retrieved January 9, 2015.
 Parish, Jeremy March 5, 2010. Final Fantasy XIII Review for the PS3. 1UP.com. Archived from the original on May 7, 2011. Retrieved June 30, 2010.
 Jackson, Mike March 5, 2010. Review: Final Fantasy XIII Review. Computer and Video Games. Archived from the original on May 7, 2011. Retrieved June 30, 2010.
 Review: Final Fantasy XIII. Edge. March 5, 2010. Archived from the original on May 7, 2011. Retrieved June 30, 2010.
 Reilly, Jim December 8, 2009. First Final Fantasy Review Score Not So Perfect. IGN. News Corporation. Archived from the original on May 7, 2011. Retrieved December 8, 2009.
 Juba, Joe March 5, 2010. Square Enix Delivers A Great Game, Not A Savior  Final Fantasy XIII  PlayStation 3  www.GameInformer.com. Game Informer. Archived from the original on January 30, 2015. Retrieved January 8, 2012.
 VanOrd, Kevin March 5, 2010. Final Fantasy XIII Review for PlayStation 3. GameSpot. Archived from the original on March 7, 2010. Retrieved March 5, 2010.
 Peckham, Matt March 5, 2010. Final Fantasy XIII Review. GameSpy. Archived from the original on August 25, 2014. Retrieved April 5, 2013.
 Clements, Ryan March 8, 2010. Final Fantasy XIII Review. IGN. News Corporation. Archived from the original on May 7, 2011. Retrieved March 8, 2010.
 McCarthy, David February 2010. Final Fantasy XIII. PlayStation Official Magazine 39: 100103.
 Winterhalter, Ryan. Final Fantasy XIII Import review. Nowgamer. Archived from the original on May 7, 2011. Retrieved June 30, 2010.
 Alexander, Leigh December 18, 2009. FFXIII Tops 1 Million Units Day One. Gamasutra. Archived from the original on May 10, 2010. Retrieved December 18, 2009.
 Nintendo Dominates, Software Sales Rebound in Japan. 1UP.com. Ziff Davis. January 13, 2010. Archived from the original on May 7, 2011. Retrieved January 4, 2011.
 2010 Top 100 Console Software in Japan. The Magic Box. Archived from the original on August 12, 2014. Retrieved February 4, 2015.
 Gantayat, Anoop December 17, 2009. Final Fantasy XIII Nears 2 Million. IGN. News Corporation. Archived from the original on May 7, 2011. Retrieved January 4, 2011.
 Sharkey, Mike March 19, 2010. Final Fantasy XIII: Biggest First Week in Franchise History. GameSpy. Archived from the original on May 7, 2011. Retrieved March 19, 2010.
 Clements, Ryan April 15, 2010. Final Fantasy XIII Leads on PS3. IGN. News Corporation. Archived from the original on May 7, 2011. Retrieved April 20, 2010.
 Prell, Sophie January 18, 2013. Lightning Returns: Final Fantasy XIIIs creators justify a third game in a series with falling sales. Penny Arcade Report. Archived from the original on August 27, 2013. Retrieved May 8, 2013.
 Ishaan December 22, 2011. A Closer Look At Final Fantasy XIII2s Performance In Japan. Siliconera. Archived from the original on April 5, 2012. Retrieved April 5, 2012.
 Final Fantasy XIII on Steam. Steam Spy. Archived from the original on September 12, 2015. Retrieved September 12, 2015.
 FINAL FANTASY XIII SERIES ANNOUNCED FOR WINDOWS PC 2. Square Enix. September 18, 2014. Archived from the original on February 9, 2015.
 FF13 in Japanese. Famitsu. December 2009. Archived from the original on July 23, 2011. Retrieved January 12, 2010.
 2009 in Japanese. ASCII Media Works. January 2010. Archived from the original on May 7, 2011. Retrieved January 12, 2010.
 Top Games Ever Made as Voted by Fans. Famitsu in Japanese. 1104. January 2010.
 Watts, Steve November 17, 2010. Spike Video Game Awards Nominees List Revealed. 1UP.com. Ziff Davis. Retrieved May 13, 2011.
 AwardWinning. Square Enix. 2010. Archived from the original on May 18, 2016.
 YinPoole, Wesley March 5, 2010. Final Fantasy XIII Review for PS3. VideoGamer.com. Archived from the original on May 7, 2011. Retrieved June 30, 2010.
 Kohler, Chris March 5, 2010. Review: Beautiful, Boring Final Fantasy XIII Loses RPG Magic. Wired News. Archived from the original on April 25, 2010. Retrieved June 30, 2010.
 McElroy, Griffin March 5, 2010. Review: Final Fantasy XIII. Joystiq. Archived from the original on May 7, 2011. Retrieved June 30, 2010.
 Glasser, A. J. March 5, 2010. Final Fantasy XIII Review from GamePro. GamePro. Archived from the original on May 7, 2011. Retrieved June 30, 2010.
 Ingham, Tim February 16, 2010. Final Fantasy XIII boss responds to review scores. ComputerAndVideoGames.com. Archived from the original on May 8, 2011. Retrieved June 30, 2010.
 Parish, Jeremy February 22, 2010. Final Fantasy XIII is Not an RPG. 1UP.com. Retrieved March 16, 2012.
 Nutt, Christian July 26, 2011. QA: The Real Story Behind Final Fantasy XIII2. Gamasutra. Archived from the original on July 26, 2011. Retrieved July 26, 2011.
 Nutt, Christian July 12, 2010. Square Enix in 2010: President Wada Speaks. Gamasutra. Archived from the original on November 9, 2010. Retrieved September 12, 2010.
 Roberts, Samuel October 30, 2014. Final Fantasy XIII Review. PC Gamer. Future. Archived from the original on July 2, 2016. Retrieved May 24, 2017.
 McWhertor, Michael October 9, 2014. Final Fantasy 13 comes to PC, but its not getting a great reception. Polygon. Vox Media. Archived from the original on December 4, 2016. Retrieved May 24, 2017.
 Thoman, Peter December 15, 2014. Final Fantasy XIII and XIII2 port analysis: Durantes verdict. PC Gamer. Future. Archived from the original on November 27, 2016. Retrieved May 24, 2017.
 Final Fantasy 132 release date. GameRant. Archived from the original on July 8, 2012. Retrieved June 16, 2012.
 Final Fantasy XIII2 dated Special Edition PS3 announced. Gematsu. Archived from the original on March 31, 2012. Retrieved June 16, 2012.
   XIII2013FF Final Fantasy XIII Lightning Returns Lightning series final chapter will be released in 2013! FF Exhibition Report. Famitsu in Japanese. September 1, 2012. Archived from the original on March 1, 2013. Retrieved February 10, 2013.
 Sinan Kubba June 6, 2013. Lightning Returns: Final Fantasy XIII hits NA Feb 11 2014, EU Feb 14. Joystiq. Archived from the original on January 28, 2015. Retrieved June 6, 2013.
External links
2000s portal
Video games portal

Book: Final Fantasy series
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Final Fantasy XIII.
Official website
vte
Fabula Nova Crystallis Final Fantasy
vte
Final Fantasy series
Categories: Final Fantasy XIIIFinal Fantasy video games2009 video gamesRoleplaying video gamesDystopian video gamesScience fiction video gamesSingleplayer video gamesPlayStation 3 gamesXbox 360 gamesWindows gamesAndroid operating system gamesIOS gamesCancelled PlayStation 2 gamesSquare Enix gamesJapanese roleplaying video gamesVideo games developed in JapanVideo games featuring female protagonistsDiscrimination in fictionPropaganda in fictionRebellions in fictionDeicide in fiction

This is a good article. Follow the link for more information.
Final Fantasy XV
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
Final Fantasy XV
FF XV cover art.jpg
DevelopersSquare Enix Business Division 2
PublishersSquare Enix
DirectorsHajime Tabata
ProducersShinji Hashimoto
DesignersTakatsugu Nakazawa
Artists
Tomohiro Hasegawa
Yusuke Naora
Isamu Kamikokuryo
Writers
Saori Itamuro
Akiko Ishibashi
Takumi Nishida
Kazushige Nojima
ComposersYoko Shimomura
Series
Final Fantasy main
Fabula Nova Crystallis Final Fantasy sub
EngineLuminous Studio
Platforms
PlayStation 4
Xbox One
Microsoft Windows
Release
PlayStation 4, Xbox One
November 29, 2016
Windows
March 6, 2018
GenresAction roleplaying
ModesSingleplayer
Final Fantasy XVa is an action roleplaying developed and published by Square Enix as part of the longrunning Final Fantasy series. It was released for the PlayStation 4 and Xbox One in 2016, and for Microsoft Windows in 2018. The game features an open world environment and actionbased battle system, incorporating quickswitching weapons, elemental magic, and other features such as vehicle travel and camping. The base campaign was later expanded with downloadable content DLC, adding further gameplay options such as additional playable characters and multiplayer.

Final Fantasy XV takes place on the fictional world of Eos; aside from the capital of Lucis, all the world is dominated by the empire of Niflheim, who seek control of the magical Crystal protected by Luciss royal family. On the eve of peace negotiations, Niflheim attacks the capital and steals the Crystal. Noctis Lucis Caelum, heir to the Lucian throne, goes on a quest to rescue the Crystal and defeat Niflheim. He later learns his full role as the True King, destined to use the Crystals powers to save Eos from eternal darkness. The game shares a thematic connection with Fabula Nova Crystallis Final Fantasy, a subseries of games linked by a common mythos which includes Final Fantasy XIII and Final Fantasy Type0.

The games development began in 2006 as a PlayStation 3 spinoff titled Final Fantasy Versus XIII.b Tetsuya Nomura served as the original director and character designer. After a development period of six years, it was changed to the next mainline title in the series in 2012; Nomura was replaced as director by Hajime Tabata, and the game shifted to eighth generation platforms. Due to the changes, the story needed to be rewritten and some scenes and characters were repurposed or removed. The setting of Final Fantasy XV was a fantasy based on reality, with locations and creatures based on elements from the real world.

To supplement the game, Square Enix created a multimedia project called the Final Fantasy XV Universe, which includes a few spinoff games, as well as an anime series and feature film. Gameplay and storybased DLC is also set for release up until early 2019. Upon release, Final Fantasy XV was well received by journalists. Praise was given for its gameplay, visuals, and emotional weight, while reception towards its story and presentation was mixed. By September 2018, the game had sold over eight million copies worldwide.


Contents
1Gameplay
1.1Battle system
1.2Character progression
1.3Multiplayer
2Synopsis
2.1Setting
2.2Characters
2.3Plot
3Development
3.1Final Fantasy XV Universe
3.2Release
3.2.1Downloadable content
4Reception
4.1Sales
4.2Accolades
5References
6External links
Gameplay
Final Fantasy XV is an open world action roleplaying game where players take control of main protagonist Noctis Lucis Caelum during his journey across the world of Eos. While accompanied by his three companions Gladiolus, Ignis and Prompto, Noctis is the only character directly controlled by the player: he can navigate through simple movement, jump over small obstacles, sprint for a limited time, and perform contextbased actions such as taking cover behind objects.12 The kingdom of Lucis is a large connected landmass that can be explored on foot, by using the partys car Regalia, or chocobos, recurring galliform birds in the Final Fantasy series.34 Both the Regalia and chosen Chocobos can be customised by the player, and Chocobos can join in battles if their connection to the characters is strong enough. While Chocobos are controlled manually, the Regalia can be either manually or automatically controlled. The party can also fasttravel to areas unlocked on the world map. The Regalia must be refueled periodically at petrol stations.567 In towns the party can visit, there are inns and hotels where they can stay, shops where items and equipment can be purchased with the ingame currency gil, and local tipsters, nonplayable characters NPCs who provide information on quests, from main story missions to side quests. Side quests are also available from individual NPCs found in towns.17 During some story sequences, dialogue choices appear for Noctis, with the selected option altering the response from NPCs.7 The game also contains two difficulty modes, with players being able to switch between the two.1

Battle system

The Active Cross Battle system in action, showing Noctis attacking a hostile soldier in one of the games environments
The game uses an actionbased realtime battle system, called the Active Cross Battle system. Instead of using a menu interface, the player selects commands directly mapped to buttons on the controller, such as Attack, Defend, and Item.2 Battles take place within the current environment rather than transitioning to a separate arena, and can range from open plains to enclosed building interiors.18 When approaching enemies, a threat meter appears on the top of the screen, growing in intensity the closer the party gets to the enemy. When the party gets close and attacks or is detected, the battle begins. Running away from enemies and out of the combat zone in normal battles ends combat. During battle, each character has health points HP, and Noctis also has magic points MP. HP is depleted whenever a character is attacked, while Noctiss MP recovers over time when not in combat or when not using associated abilities such as warping or special weapon skills. If a characters current HP reaches zero, they enter Danger Mode, during which the maximum HP cap steadily decreases; the character is defeated when all of their maximum HP is lost. Some enemies, such as Daemons, are able to lower the HP cap with their attacks. If Noctis is defeated, there is a brief period where a revival item must be used. Should the player fail to do so, the game ends.1

Noctis can perform four actions in battle: the standard attack; defending, which blocks and parries attacks; warping, which takes Noctis to a targeted area such as another enemy or an outoftheway warp point, and using items. There is a Wait Mode option available, where if all player input stops the battle pauses, and players are able to select new enemies to attack or actions to take within a time limit.18 An option available for both Noctis and Ignis in Wait Mode is Libra, an ability which displays an enemys health, strengths and weaknesses.1 Noctis can find and equip a wide range of weapons, including single and doublehanded swords, polearms, axes, shields, firearms, daggers and Royal Arms. The weapons manifest from thin air as Noctis fights, and can be manually shifted by the player. The type of weapon equipped determines the attack speed and the amount of damage on normal attacks. In addition to normal attacks, there are attacks that deal more damage based on Noctis position such as Side Strike or Blindside, in addition to the Warp Strike attack. Attacks from enemies can be parried, and depending on the quality of the parry Noctis can counterattack. If wielding a shieldtype weapon, a successful block staggers an enemy, leaving them vulnerable to attack. Noctis can launch a special attack with the Royal Arms dubbed Armiger, when the meter fills during combat: while more powerful than standard weapons, Royal Arms consume HP with each use.156 Noctis can also use two classes of firearmsGuns, which range from handguns like pistols to rifles; and Machinery, powerful weapons that have varying effects depending on the type used, from generating a powerful shockwave to dealing high melee damage.9

Noctiss companions, controlled by the games artificial intelligence AI, can perform contextual commands. When Noctis successfully parries an enemy attack, or performs a Side Strike or Blindside, cooperative attacks between him and his companions called Linkstrikes can be triggered. During battle, a meter called the Tech Bar fills. When full, Noctis can command his companions to perform special moves called Techniques: Gladiolus performs a sweeping attack with his sword, Ignis uses his daggers to mark enemies so Noctis can perform a warp strike attack, and Prompto uses his firearm to fire a powerful shot that pierces through tough opponents. After each of these, Noctis can initiate a followup attack. Noctis can also trigger an Armiger Chain, where he splits his Royal Arms between his companions before launching a single attack.510

Magic is separated into two types: Elemancy and Arcana.10 Elemancy is separated into three types: Fire, Ice and Lightning. Elemental energy is drawn from points across the world map, being absorbed into special flasks and used to craft magical bombs that can be used on enemies. Elemancy can also be combined with specific items to add new effects, such as healing party members while damaging enemies. Both Noctis and his companions are able to use Elemancy.110 Arcana, accessed when Noctis has acquired and equipped a storyrelated item called the Ring of the Lucii, has access to more powerful magical abilities such as Death, which drains an enemys health.10 After a certain point in the game, Noctis can call upon summoned monsters called Astrals, which aid the party by launching a devastating attack. The summons featured are series regulars including Titan, Ramuh, Leviathan and Shiva. Their types of attack, and even whether they assist at all, is dependent on the environment: for instance, Leviathan can only be summoned in the open when there is a body of water nearby.61011 At certain points in the story, Noctis is joined by guest characters who have their own Linkstrikes and Techniques.12

Character progression
After each battle, characters earn experience points EXP, but they do not automatically level up when a certain amount of EXP has been gathered. Instead, the party must go to safe zones called Havens, namely rest sites like inns or campsites. When the party rests at night, each character gains levels depending on the amount of EXP earned. If defeated in battle, all EXP gained up to that point since the last level up is permanently lost. Activities in the overworld earn the party Ability Points AP. AP is spent on the Ascension Grid, the games leveling system, which is divided into skill trees called Astralspheres. Each Astralsphere is sorted by type, being associated with magic, combat or passive abilities. Spending AP opens up nodes within the Astralsphere, which in turn grants access to further nodes which require higher amounts of AP to unlock.16

Noctis companions each have their own skills which themselves level up based on usage, and affect equipment. Noctis fishing ability improves the more times he fishes and the better items he uses, which in turn spreads to his equipment. Gladiolus Survival skills increase based on the distance the party has travelled in a day, which improves the quality of their equipment and items. Ignis cooking can be improved based on ingredients either purchased at shops or found in the wild, and his meals grant stat boosts to the party. Prompto takes photos during the partys journey, and the quality of his own skills increase over time.16 A postrelease update enables control of all four characters during battle after unlocking a dedicated node in the Ascension Grid; each character uses specific weapon types and abilities tied to them.13

Multiplayer
A multiplayer mode called Comrades was released as an expansion, with gameplay and combat lifted from the main game and tailored for multiplayer; rather than a preset character, players take the role of a customizable avatar who takes part in a portion of the story skipped over by the main narrative. The game begins with players choosing their gender, hairstyle, clothing and other aspects. Using the ingame city of Lestallum as their base, the player is assigned missions with three other characterseither other players or AIcontrolled. During missions, the player fights monsters either on sorties or to defend transports; at the end of each mission, the player is awarded Gil, materials used for crafting and enhancing weapons, and Meteorshards which can power up settlements around Lestallum and open up new quests. Some areas unlock Royal Tombs which grant the player a Royal Sigil; these Sigils both increase specific statistics and grant new themed abilities such as healing or increasing combat moves. The player has access to a variety of weapon types from normal swords to maces and shurikens, which are enhanced using materials to increase passive abilities such as their damage capacity.14

Synopsis
Setting
Final Fantasy XV takes place on the Earthlike world of Eos,15 which is divided between four nations: Lucis, Accordo, Tenebrae and Niflheim. Lucis, occupying a whole landmass, possesses a magical artifact known as the Crystal, gifted to the reigning Caelum dynasty by the worlds deities in antiquity and accessed through the hereditary Ring of the Lucii. Accordo, located in the southern part of Eos, is an island nation formed through a union of free trading cities. The western continent is home to the technologicallyadvanced empire of Niflheim and the nation of Tenebrae, which is ruled by the Oraclea priestess who can commune with the gods. The Oracles main task is curing the Starscourge, a plague that absorbs all natural light and allows nocturnal monsters known as Daemons to roam the world.161718:318319

Central to the lore of Eos are the Astrals, six divine beings who serve as the guardians of the natural world and are based on summoned monsters from the Final Fantasy series;61920 and the True King, a legendary figure prophesied to appear when the Starscourge threatens to plunge Eos into eternal night.21 A key part of Eoss backstory is the Great War of Old, a conflict born when the ancient human civilization of Solheim turned on the Astrals and their patron Ifrit; Ifrits attempt to destroy humanity defied the Astrals duty to protect Eos, forcing them to kill Ifrit. The Great War of Old is implied to have caused the spread of the Starscourge across the planet, hastening the fall of Solheim.18:31831921

For centuries, Lucis has been at war with the militaristic Niflheim, who seek to emulate Solheims glory. To that end Niflheim has subjugated most of Eos, including Accordo and Tenebrae; Tenebrae retains limited political autonomy due to the Oracles influence. Only Luciss capital city of Insomnia remains unconquered due to the use of the Crystals power, which is slowly draining the king of his life force. At the games beginning an armistice is declared between the two nations due to the kings failing health; as part of the peace agreements, Niflheim will gain control of all Lucian territories outside Insomnia, and a marriage is arranged between the heirs apparent of the royal families of Lucis and Tenebrae.161721

Characters

Promotional artwork featuring several of the main cast of Final Fantasy XV. From left: Gladiolus Amicitia, Noctis Lucis Caelum, Ignis Scientia and Prompto Argentum.
Main article: Characters of Final Fantasy XV
The two main characters are Noctis Lucis Caelum, the crown prince of Lucis and the sole playable character who loses his father in the Niflheim invasion; and his fiance Lunafreya Nox Fleuret, the current Oracle and former princess of Tenebrae. Noctis is accompanied on his journey by three others: Gladiolus Amicitia, the scion of a family sworn to protect Noctiss family; Ignis Scientia, a prodigy military tactician and Noctiss advisor; and Prompto Argentum, a friend of Noctis from a lower social class. Guest characters include Cor Leonis, a legendary warrior of Lucis who acts as an early guide to Noctiss party; and Iris Amicitia, Gladioluss sister. Other key characters are Regis Lucis Caelum CXIII, king of Lucis and Noctiss father; Gentiana, Lunafreyas attendant; and Cid Sophiar and his granddaughter Cindy Aurum, mechanics who maintain the partys car. The empire of Niflheim is ruled by Emperor Iedolas Aldercapt. Aldercapts allies include Ardyn Izunia, the imperial chancellor and the games main antagonist; Ravus Nox Fleuret, Lunafreyas brother and the high commander of Niflheims army; Verstael Besithia, the empires head researcher; and Aranea Highwind, a mercenary dragoon in service to Niflheim.

Plot
Noctis and his three friends begin their journey to Altissia, the capital of Accordo, where Noctiss wedding to Lunafreya will take place. Finding the local boat services stopped, they receive news of Niflheims attack on the city of Insomnia and theft of the Crystal; the Lucian King Regis has been assassinated, and both Noctis and Lunafreya are declared dead.22 Meeting up with Cor, Noctis is tasked with retrieving the Royal Armsthe magical weapons of past Lucian kingsto rescue the Crystal and reclaim his throne.23 While staying in the city of Lestallum with Iris, Noctis is contacted by the Astral Titan; encouraged by Ardyn, Noctis endures Titans trial and earns his power, learning that Lunafreya is traveling ahead of Noctis to awaken the Astrals from their slumber.2425 The group continues to travel across Lucis, retrieving the Royal Arms and meeting the Astral Ramuh with assistance from Gentiana. He is also confronted by a hostile Ravus, spars with the mercenary Aranea, and receives further aid from Ardyn.262728 The group eventually recover parts to repair Regiss old yacht, using it to travel to Altissia.29

The party arrives in Altissia, where Lunafreya has taken sanctuary. Lunafreya awakens the Astral Leviathan so Noctis can obtain her power, only for Leviathan to go on a rampage when Niflheim attacks. Ardyn appears and mortally wounds Lunafreya, disrupting the ritual; however, she succeeds in awakening Noctiss powers, allowing him to defeat Leviathan. While unconscious, he is visited in a dream by Lunafreyas spirit, who gives him the Ring of the Lucii. Noctis wakes to find Altissia in chaos, and that Ignis was blinded during the battle.30 The party continues towards Niflheims capital of Gralea by train. Ignis blindness and Noctiss mourning of Lunafreya cause friction with Gladiolus until Ignis forces a reconciliation. It is also revealed that the nights are growing longer, causing more Daemons to appear.31 Ardyn then tricks Noctis into throwing Prompto from the train, and holds Prompto and the Crystal captive in Graleas military fortress Zegnautus Keep, revealing the Crystals power can destroy the Daemons.3233 Noctis continues to Tenebrae, where Aranea is aiding refugees from across Eos. While in Tenebrae, Noctis learns that Lunafreya was dying from waking the Astrals, and that Ravus now supports him. On the final journey to Gralea, the train is ambushed by Daemons; after defeating them, Noctis receives the Astral Shivas blessing from Gentiana, who reveals herself as Shivas human form.33

Arriving to find Gralea overrun by Daemons, Noctis is separated from his friends and forced to use the Ring of the Lucii to survive Zegnautus Keep. After reuniting and rescuing Prompto, the party continues through Zegnautus Keep, defeating Ravus and Emperor Aldercapt, who have been transformed into Daemons. Forced to leave his friends behind, Noctis reaches the Crystal, only to be pulled into it. Ardyn appears and reveals himself to be Ardyn Lucis Caelum, a former healer whose infection by the Starscourge led to the Astrals and Crystal rejecting him; rendered immortal by the Starscourge, Ardyn has since sought revenge on the royal bloodline and the Crystal, hastening the onset of the Starscourge while waiting for the True King to appear so he could destroy them both.34 Within the Crystal, Noctis encounters the Astral Bahamut; he learns that he is the True King of prophecy, who will cleanse the Starscourge and restore light to Eos at the cost of his life. Noctis returns to Eos after ten years, finding the world engulfed in darkness. Reuniting with his friends, Noctis heads for Insomnia, fighting Ifritrevived and corrupted by the Starscourgebefore facing Ardyn. After killing Ardyn in single combat, Noctis ascends the throne and sacrifices himself, using the Crystal and Ring of the Lucii to purge the Starscourge from Eos. In the afterlife, with help from Lunafreya, Noctis destroys Ardyns spirit. In midcredits and postcredits scenes, Noctis opens up to his companions before the final battle, and finds rest with Lunafreya in the afterlife.35

The journeys of Noctis friends during their absence in the main story are later expanded through downloadable content DLC. In Episode Gladiolus, Gladiolus ends up testing his strength against recurring Final Fantasy character Gilgamesh following their first confrontation with Ravus.36 Episode Prompto follows the titular character after Ardyn tricks Noctis into throwing him from the train to Tenebrae, and focuses on his origins as Verstaels cloned son, designed as one of Niflheims Magitek soldiers. With help from Aranea, Prompto defeats Verstaelwho transfers his soul to the Magitek creation Immortalis to conquer Eosbefore heading for Gralea.37 In Episode Ignis, Ignis allies with a disillusioned Ravus in the wake of Leviathans rampage. After finding Lunafreya dead and Noctis unconscious, they are ambushed by Ardyn; Ignis uses the Ring of the Lucii to save Noctis, which costs him his sight. In an alternate scenario, Ignis surrenders to Ardyn instead of confronting him, triggering an unspecified chain of events that leaves both Ravus and Noctis alive after the final battle.38 In the story mode for the multiplayer expansion Comrades, the player controls a survivor of the Kingsglaive, Regiss bodyguard who abandoned him during Niflheims attack on Lucis. Despite the peoples mistrust, the Kingsglaive help defend humanitys last stronghold of Lestallum while experiencing visions of Noctiss resting place on the island of Angelgard. Drawn to Angelgard, the Kingsglaive face Bahamut in combat and are absolved of their treachery, dedicating themselves to protecting Angelgard from Daemons during Noctiss slumber.39

Development
Main article: Development of Final Fantasy XV
Final Fantasy XV was primarily developed by Business Division 2 of Square Enix, creators and developers of the Final Fantasy franchise.40 Additional studios that helped with development included HexaDrive, XPEC Entertainment, Plusmile, Umbra, and Streamline Studios.41424344 Staff included director Hajime Tabata; producer Shinji Hashimoto; main writer Saori Itamuro, who wrote the scenario based on the original draft by Kazushige Nojima; and art directors Tomohiro Hasegawa, Yusuke Naora and Isamu Kamikokuryo.4546 Character designs were by Tetsuya Nomura and Roberto Ferrari, with later revisions by Naora.45474849 The main characters clothing was designed by Hiromu Takahara, lead designer for Japanese fashion house Roen.47 The soundtrack for Final Fantasy XV was composed primarily by Yoko Shimomura, while both realtime and CGI cutscenes were directed by Takeshi Nozue of Visual Works, Square Enixs inhouse CGI production studio.4550 Logo illustration was by regular series artist Yoshitaka Amano.17

Development began in 2006 as a spinoff title for the PlayStation 3 called Final Fantasy Versus XIII. It was announced as part of the Fabula Nova Crystallis Final Fantasy, a subseries of games linked by a common mythos, and ran in Square Enixs proprietary Crystal Tools engine. Developed by the team behind the Kingdom Hearts series, it was intended to be a darker entry in the Final Fantasy series than allowed in the main series.515253 Nomura was the original director, designer, and created the initial concept and scenario.4547 The project suffered from a prolonged and troubled development, only making fragmentary appearances over the following six years.5455 As early as 2007, the projects scale prompted talks of rebranding it as the next mainline entry. With the internal unveiling of the PlayStation 4 and Xbox One, it was decided to change it into a mainline entry, with a proposed PS3 version being scrapped due to technical troubles. The games engine also changed, shifting to the companys new proprietary game engine Luminous Studio.25657 At the time of its rebranding and shift to nextgeneration consoles in 2012, Versus XIII was described as being on 2025 complete, with Tabata saying it never took shape.5859

When Tabata took over from Nomura, the entire development team was reshuffled and development started over again, although he worked as a codirector with Nomura until late 2013 to ensure the project remained as true as possible to its original vision.25460 Among the changes were the removal of the original storys opening, and the replacement of the original heroine Stella Nox Fleuret with the similarly named Lunafreya.6162 The connection to Fabula Nova Crystallis was also reduced, with branding and mythosspecific terminology removed to aid in the games marketing. Thematic, aesthetic and design elements were retained due to their core place in the world and backstory.1721:5925975863 The main concept behind Final Fantasy XV was a fantasy based on reality, with the world being very similar to Earth and having fantasy elements gradually intruding into an otherwise normal setting. In pursuit of this, locations in Eos were based on realworld locations such as Tokyo, Venice and the Bahamas.41741

Final Fantasy XV Universe
Main articles: Kingsglaive: Final Fantasy XV, Brotherhood: Final Fantasy XV, Monster of the Deep: Final Fantasy XV, and Final Fantasy XV: A New Empire
Due to the scale of the games narrative and Tabatas wish to release a single game rather than a series of games similar to Final Fantasy XIII, aspects of the planned narrative were refashioned into supplementary media projects.64 Known as the Final Fantasy XV Universe, the projects were split into two parts; media designed to reach a wider audience than the game might manage alone, and additional gamerelated content such as ports to other hardware and DLC.65 The project was first revealed at a March 2016 press event called Uncovered: Final Fantasy XV.66 Tabata later stated that those who just played the game would miss context for story events shown in other related media.65

The two central parts of the Final Fantasy XV Universe are the feature film Kingsglaive: Final Fantasy XV and the original net animation Brotherhood: Final Fantasy XV.64 Brotherhood was produced by anime studio A1 Pictures under supervision from Square Enix;67 the narrative focused on the backstories of Noctis and his companions.68 The series was released online between March and September 2016.6970 Kingsglaive, which received a limited theatrical release in 2016, was a collaboration between Visual Works and Western studios including Digic Pictures and Image Engine;7172 the story, which mainly focused on original characters, recycled story elements cut from the opening narrative of Final Fantasy XV.73

Also forming part of the project were Platinum Demo: Final Fantasy XV, a game demo detailing an incident in Noctiss childhood which tied into the events of Brotherhood;6474 Justice Monsters Five, a mobile game based on a minigame from Final Fantasy XV which was active from August 2016 to March 2017;667576 A Kings Tale: Final Fantasy XV, a promotional beat em up featuring Regis as the playable character;77 Monster of the Deep: Final Fantasy XV, a virtual reality simulation game released in 2017 for PlayStation VR;78 and Final Fantasy XV: A New Empire, a massively multiplayer online strategy game published by Machine Zone in 2017 and developed by their Epic Action subsidiary.7980

Release
See also: Final Fantasy XV: Pocket Edition
Initially announced in 2006 alongside XIII and Type0, the game was publicly rebranded at the 2013 Electronic Entertainment Expo, with regular updates on the title beginning the following year.55 A demo titled Final Fantasy XV: Episode Duscae was released in March 2015 as a limited addition to Final Fantasy Type0 HD.818283 The games localization was handled by Dan Inoue, who used different accents for characters to denote their origins on different parts of Eos.84 In addition to English, Japanese and European languages, the game was localized for Latin America with Latin American Spanish and Brazilian Portuguese text: this was the first time a Final Fantasy title was localized into these languages.85

Its initial worldwide release, September 30, was announced at the Uncovered event.66 Despite this intended date, further polishing work resulted in the date being pushed back to November 29.8687 Further fixes were applied to the game through a Day One patch released concurrent with the game.88 The game was published in multiple editions, called Day One, Deluxe, and Ultimate Collectors Edition.89 The Deluxe edition included a Bluray edition of Kingsglaive, while the Ultimate Collectors Edition included both Kingsglaive and a version of Brotherhood with additional footage related to Luna.678990 In 2018, a version of the game called Royal Edition was released, which contained both all DLC published to that point in addition to further story and gameplay additions alongside technical improvements.91

A version for Microsoft Windows was released on March 6, 2018. Square Enix developed the port with Nvidia using an upgraded version of the Luminous Studio engine, featuring graphical enhancements and all DLC.919293 These improvements and additions were also released as part of the consoleexclusive Royal Edition.91 Another version, titled Final Fantasy XV: Pocket Edition, was released in February 2018 for iOS and Android.94 The game was codeveloped by Square Enix, SummerTimeStudio, and XPEC Entertainment.9596 Development began in 2015 following the release of Episode Duscae; the game was produced by Kosei Ito, who was producer on Tabatas first major Square Enix title Before Crisis: Final Fantasy VII.9697

Downloadable content
Multiple pieces of downloadable content DLC have been created for the game by a smaller development team from the core Final Fantasy XV staff. The team is supervised by Tabata and headed by new producer Haruyoshi Sawatari.9811 Both free and paid DLC were announced, with paid DLC being a necessity due to overall production costs.99 Among the DLC were additional story elements intended to address player criticisms of the games narrative structure and missing details.91100 The main DLC episodes focusing on filling in narrative gaps related to Noctiss friendsEpisode Gladiolus, Episode Prompto and Episode Igniswere released respectively in March, June and December 2017.101102103 A multiplayer mode called Comrades was released in November 2017, with Final Fantasy XV becoming the first mainline singleplayer Final Fantasy to include multiplayer content.104105 A standalone version of Comrades will release for PS4 and Xbox One in December 2018.106

Episode Ignis was intended to be the last storybased DLC, but positive player feedback resulted in Square Enix wanting to develop further content focusing on other main characters, such as Ardyn.107 While Episode Ardyn is set for release in March 2019, three other announced storybased DLC episodes were cancelled due to structural changes within Square Enix.108109 Announced features related to the PC port such as mod support were also cancelled.106 Episode Ardyn is set to be the final postrelease update for Final Fantasy XV.110 Other DLC included temporary events such as the Moogle Chocobo Carnival event and a collaboration with Assassins Creed Origins.111112

Reception
Reception
Aggregate score
AggregatorScore
MetacriticPS4: 81100113
XONE: 83100114
PC: 85100115
Royal Edition PS4: 77100116
Review scores
PublicationScore
Destructoid910117
EGM7.510118
Famitsu3840119
Game Informer8.510120
Game Revolution45 stars121
GameSpot810122
GamesRadar4.55 stars123
IGN8.210124
Polygon910125
Digital Spy3.55 stars126
Hardcore Gamer3.55127
Final Fantasy XV has received generally favorable reviews from critics for all versions, according to review aggregator Metacritic.113114115 Japanese gaming magazine Famitsu gave both versions of the game a score of 38 points out of 40.119 Various game designers stated Final Fantasy XV was their favorite game of 2016, including Final Fantasy series creator Hironobu Sakaguchi, Atlus Shigeo Komori, Koei Tecmos Takashi Morinaka, and Sony Interactive Entertainments Teruyuki Toriyama and Shuhei Yoshida.128

Opinions on the story of Final Fantasy XV were mixed, although the main cast was praised for its chemistry.117120124123126 Game Informers Andrew Reiner praised the change to a simple straightforward plot after the complex lore of Final Fantasy XIII.120 Peter Brown of GameSpot and Philip Kollar of Polygon praised the mundane activities and character interactions, with Kollar calling Noctiss companions the games beating heart,122125 In contrast, Jonathan Leack of Game Revolution found the characters lacked interest during the early parts of the campaign,121 and Hardcore Gamers Adam Beck called the main story and characters a monumental disappointment.127 The minimal representation of supporting characters was also frequently faulted.117118122123 David Roberts of GamesRadar, Electronic Gaming Monthlys Mollie L. Patterson and Destructoids Chris Carter also noted the crucial part played by the games expanded media in grounding or fleshing out the main story.117118123

The visuals and realistic style were positively received, with IGNs Vince Ingenito enjoying the unusual use of realistic aesthetic details for the towns and environment.124 Roberts, Brown, Leack, Beck and Kollar praised the open world design and depth of detail, in addition to its scale and similarity to open worlds from recent Western games.121122123125127 Beck also noted the setpiece moments as beautiful in appearance despite weak narrative elements and confusing or convoluted gameplay.127 Leack positively noted the main casts eyecatching design, which he felt helped maintain a connection during the early sections of the game.121 Shimomuras score was also positively received by critics.118120127

The gameplay was praised for its fast pace and engaging mechanics despite a lack of depth compared with other action games, with several reviewers comparing it to Kingdom Hearts;117120122124125 Patterson positively compared normal battles to the CGI cutsceneexclusive battles of earlier Square Enix titles,118 while Leack called the combat system Kingdom Hearts meets Dissidia and praised its depth and accessibility.121 Digital Spys Kirk McKeand praised the behaviour of Noctiss companions in battle, saying they were effective supporting units.126 The linear second half drew criticism, with Roberts predicting that it would be one of the games most divisive elements.123125127 The summons were seen as spectacular, but either lacking meaning in gameplay or being too difficult to activate.117118122124 Several reviewers noted the ingame cameras occasionally erratic behaviour.120121125

Sales
In Japan, the PS4 version topped Japanese gaming charts, selling 690,471 units. The Xbox One version sold nearly 3,800 units. Total sales of both versions came to 694,262 units, with the games release boosting console sales for the PS4 over the previous week by over 42,000 units.129 Second week sales in the region were 79,792 units, down 88 from launch week and causing the game to drop to fifth place.130 Different rankings in January the following year placed the Japanese sales of Final Fantasy XV as between 900,000 and one million copies.131132 In the United Kingdoms allformat gaming charts ending December 3, Final Fantasy XV was the second biggest launch for the series after Final Fantasy XIII.133 According to the December data released by the NPD Group, Final Fantasy XV was the second bestselling title of the month behind Call of Duty: Infinite Warfare. The game also became the months bestselling PS4 title, and saw the best console launch month in the franchises history.134

Within the first twentyfour hours, Square Enix reported that Final Fantasy XV had shipped five million units worldwide in both physical shipments and digital salesa figure which allowed the game to break even on development costs.135 This gave Final Fantasy XV the biggest launch in the franchise to date, the most first day digital sales in Japan for a game up to that point, and set records for physical shipments and downloads in mainland Asia.136 Commenting on the large numbers, Tabata revealed that the strong sales saved the Final Fantasy franchise as a whole, which had seen declining commercial success in recent years.137 According to Square Enix, shipments had reached over six million worldwide by January 2017.138 In May of the same year, Square announced the game and Rise of the Tomb Raider helped to increase sales and profits for the 20162017 fiscal year.139 In a later interview, Enterbrain president Hirokazu Hamamura stated that the game had sold seven million copies worldwide by January 2018, ranking it as a huge success.140 By September 2018, that total, which included the Windows version, had surpassed 8.1 million.141

Accolades
Final Fantasy XV won numerous awards from various gaming publications, including Game of the Year from RPG Site and RPGFan,142143 and Best RPG Peoples Choice from IGN,144 PlayStation Blog awarded Final Fanasy XV awards in the categories of Best PS4 Game, Best Use of Pro, Best Soundtrack, and Best Visuals;145 and in Game Informers 2017 RPG of the Year Awards awarded the game for Best PostLaunch Support.146 At the 2017 National Academy of Video Game Trade Reviewers Awards the game won Game, Franchise Role Playing and Song, Original or Adapted.147 It was also nominated for Best Original Soundtrack Album and for Best Original Instrumental Valse di Fantastica at the 15th Annual Game Audio Network Guild Awards.148 In 2017, the game was nominated for Best Visual Design at the Golden Joystick Awards,149 and for Best RolePlaying Game at The Game Awards 2017, but lost to Cuphead and Persona 5, respectively.150 The Comrades DLC was nominated for Best Addon at the Gamescom 2017 Awards.151 The game was also nominated for Evolving Game at the 14th British Academy Games Awards.152153

References
Citations
 Final Fantasy XV Digital Miniguide PDF. Square Enix. 2016. Archived from the original PDF on November 15, 2016. Retrieved November 26, 2016.
 Slayton, Olivia October 2, 2014. Final Fantasy XV director addresses fan concerns, new gameplay. Gematsu. Archived from the original on October 2, 2014. Retrieved October 2, 2014.
 Sato April 4, 2016. Final Fantasy XV PC Release In Consideration, Plans For Paid And Free DLC. Siliconera. Archived from the original on April 4, 2016. Retrieved April 4, 2016.
 Corriea, Alexa Ray January 22, 2015. Final Fantasy XVs Map Is One Giant, Connected Land Mass. GameSpot. Archived from the original on August 10, 2015. Retrieved January 23, 2015.
 Romano, Sal November 25, 2016. Final Fantasy XV details Phantom Swords, chocobo and Regalia customization, and Ally Commands. Gematsu. Archived from the original on November 26, 2016. Retrieved November 26, 2016.
 Kishimoto, Matt November 22, 2016. 15 spoilerfree things you need to know about Final Fantasy XV. PlayStation blog. Archived from the original on November 24, 2016. Retrieved November 26, 2016.
 Romano, Sal July 21, 2016. Final Fantasy XV details Ravus, Iris, dialogue choices, shops, and more. Gematsu. Archived from the original on August 16, 2016. Retrieved November 26, 2016.
 Sato June 14, 2016. Final Fantasy XV Details About Its Road Trip, Adventure, And Combat. Siliconera. Archived from the original on July 1, 2016. Retrieved November 26, 2016.
 Romano, Sal September 2, 2016. Final Fantasy XV introduces gun and Machinery weapons. Gematsu. Archived from the original on November 12, 2016. Retrieved November 26, 2016.
 Romano, Sal October 27, 2016. Final Fantasy XV details elemental magic, ring magic, daemons, travel, more. Gematsu. Archived from the original on November 26, 2016. Retrieved November 26, 2016.
 Romano, Sal June 16, 2016. Final Fantasy XV director answers 16 fan questions at E3 2016. Gematsu. Archived from the original on June 18, 2016. Retrieved August 12, 2016.
 Sato November 16, 2016. Final Fantasy XV Shares More On Leviathan, Guest Characters, And Unique Skills. Siliconera. Archived from the original on November 19, 2016. Retrieved November 26, 2016.
 Knezevic, Kevin December 12, 2017. Final Fantasy 15 December Update Out Now, Adds Character Swapping. GameSpot. Archived from the original on December 23, 2017. Retrieved February 13, 2018.
 Wallace, Kimberley November 20, 2017. Should You Play Final Fantasy XVs Multiplayer Expansion Comrades?. Game Informer. Archived from the original on February 13, 2018. Retrieved February 13, 2018.
 Final Fantasy XV  What is Final Fantasy XV?. Final Fantasy XV Website. Archived from the original on April 3, 2016. Retrieved April 3, 2016.
 Square Enix July 9, 2016. Kingsglaive: Final Fantasy XV Promotional Art Book Program in Japanese. Square Enix. pp. 1617.
 Juba, Joe May 2016. Final Fantasy XV  The Clearing Storm. Game Informer. GameStop 277: 3864.
 Final Fantasy XV: The Complete Official Guide Collectors Edition. Piggyback Interactive. November 29, 2016. ISBN 1911015001.
 Corriae, Alexa Ray August 29, 2015. 16 More Things We Learned About Final Fantasy 15. GameSpot. Archived from the original on August 30, 2015. Retrieved August 30, 2015.
 FF152.00  in Japanese. Dengeki Online. September 22, 2015. Archived from the original on November 24, 2016. Retrieved November 26, 2016.
 XV  SIDE Final Fantasy XV Ultimania: Scenario Side in Japanese. Square Enix. December 28, 2016. ISBN 4757552149.
 Square Enix November 29, 2016. Final Fantasy XV. PlayStation 4, Xbox One. Square Enix. Levelarea: Chapter 1: Departure.
 Square Enix November 29, 2016. Final Fantasy XV. PlayStation 4, Xbox One. Square Enix. Levelarea: Chapter 2: No Turning Back.
 Square Enix November 29, 2016. Final Fantasy XV. PlayStation 4, Xbox One. Square Enix. Levelarea: Chapter 3: The Open World.
 Square Enix November 29, 2016. Final Fantasy XV. PlayStation 4, Xbox One. Square Enix. Levelarea: Chapter 4: Living Legend.
 Square Enix November 29, 2016. Final Fantasy XV. PlayStation 4, Xbox One. Square Enix. Levelarea: Chapter 5: Dark Clouds.
 Square Enix November 29, 2016. Final Fantasy XV. PlayStation 4, Xbox One. Square Enix. Levelarea: Chapter 6: A Way Forward.
 Square Enix November 29, 2016. Final Fantasy XV. PlayStation 4, Xbox One. Square Enix. Levelarea: Chapter 7: Party of Three.
 Square Enix November 29, 2016. Final Fantasy XV. PlayStation 4, Xbox One. Square Enix. Levelarea: Chapter 8: Seaworthy.
 Square Enix November 29, 2016. Final Fantasy XV. PlayStation 4, Xbox One. Square Enix. Levelarea: Chapter 9: Callings.
 Square Enix November 29, 2016. Final Fantasy XV. PlayStation 4, Xbox One. Square Enix. Levelarea: Chapter 10: The Heart of a King.
 Square Enix November 29, 2016. Final Fantasy XV. PlayStation 4, Xbox One. Square Enix. Levelarea: Chapter 11: In the Dark.
 Square Enix November 29, 2016. Final Fantasy XV. PlayStation 4, Xbox One. Square Enix. Levelarea: Chapter 12: End of Days.
 Square Enix November 29, 2016. Final Fantasy XV. PlayStation 4, Xbox One. Square Enix. Levelarea: Chapter 13: Redemption.
 Square Enix November 29, 2016. Final Fantasy XV. PlayStation 4, Xbox One. Square Enix. Levelarea: Chapter 14: Homecoming.
 Square Enix March 28, 2017. Final Fantasy XV. PlayStation 4, Xbox One. Square Enix. Levelarea: Final Fantasy XV: Episode Gladiolus.
 Square Enix June 27, 2017. Final Fantasy XV. PlayStation 4, Xbox One. Square Enix. Levelarea: Final Fantasy XV: Episode Prompto.
 Square Enix December 13, 2017. Final Fantasy XV. PlayStation 4, Xbox One. Square Enix. Levelarea: Final Fantasy XV: Episode Ignis.
 Square Enix November 15, 2017. Final Fantasy XV. PlayStation 4, Xbox One. Square Enix. Levelarea: Comrades: Final Fantasy XV.
 Valdes, Giancarlo June 12, 2016. Final Fantasy XV director on keeping a flagship Japanese series relevant in 2016. VentureBeat. Archived from the original on June 16, 2016. Retrieved July 9, 2016.
 Ike, Sato April 6, 2015. Type0 HD Developer Helping Square Enix With Final Fantasy XV Development. Siliconera. Archived from the original on April 6, 2015. Retrieved April 6, 2015.
 XV2016 in Japanese. Famitsu. February 1, 2016. Archived from the original on February 1, 2016. Retrieved February 1, 2016.
 Umbra improves framerate performance in Final Fantasy XV. Umbra. March 25, 2016. Archived from the original on March 25, 2016. Retrieved March 25, 2016.
 Batchelor, James July 12, 2016. Streamline Studios codeveloping Final Fantasy XV. Develop. Archived from the original on July 12, 2016. Retrieved July 12, 2016.
 FF152.00  in Japanese. Dengeki Online. June 4, 2015. Archived from the original on June 6, 2015. Retrieved June 6, 2015.
 Lada, Jenni December 2, 2015. Final Fantasy XVs Satoshi Kitade Says The PreBeta Build Can Be Played From Beginning To End. Siliconera. Archived from the original on December 2, 2015. Retrieved December 2, 2015.
 Romano, Sal August 6, 2010. Final Fantasy Versus XIII  all the details so far. Gematsu. Archived from the original on August 1, 2013. Retrieved September 11, 2014.
 Final Fantasy XV : La frustration de Roberto Ferrari in French. Final Fantasy Dream. August 29, 2016. Archived from the original on August 29, 2016. Retrieved August 29, 2016.
 Goldfarb, Andrew August 6, 2016. 8 Gorgeous Photos of Final Fantasy XVs Characters. IGN. Archived from the original on August 6, 2016. Retrieved August 6, 2016.
 Spencer, Yip April 3, 2015. Final Fantasys Cinematic Mastermind On Making Advent Children And FFXVs Cutscene Balance. Siliconera. Archived from the original on April 6, 2015. Retrieved April 6, 2015.
 Gantayat, Anoop May 31, 2006. Gaimaga Blows Out Final Fantasy XIII. IGN. Archived from the original on October 27, 2014. Retrieved February 10, 2010.
 Kristine, S. June 2, 2006. An Interview with the People behind Final Fantasy XIII. Qj.net. Archived from the original on July 7, 2007. Retrieved June 2, 2006.
 Jackson, Tyrell February 22, 2008. GDC: SquareEnix announces Crystal Tools. PlayStation Universe. Archived from the original on February 26, 2008. Retrieved April 1, 2009.
 Parkin, Simon November 2, 2016. Finishing Final Fantasy. Eurogamer. Archived from the original on November 2, 2016. Retrieved November 2, 2016.
 Juba, Joe March 17, 2015. Where is Final Fantasy XV Versus XIII?. Game Informer. Archived from the original on May 23, 2015. Retrieved August 15, 2015.
  XV. Weekly Famitsu in Japanese. Enterbrain 1281: 11ff. June 20, 2013.
 Soichiro June 12, 2013. E3 2013: Tetsuya Nomura spricht ber Final Fantasy XV in German. JPGames.de. Archived from the original on April 19, 2015. Retrieved April 2, 2015.
 Gamescom 2015: Hajime Tabata Interview English. Finaland. August 11, 2015. Archived from the original on August 11, 2015. Retrieved August 15, 2015.
 Goldfarb, Andrew August 31, 2015. Pax 2015: Versus XIII was 2025 Done Before It Became Final Fantasy 15. IGN. Archived from the original on August 31, 2015. Retrieved August 31, 2015.
 Ike, Sato April 5, 2016. Final Fantasy XVs Release Date Was Already Decided Back In 2013. Siliconera. Archived from the original on April 19, 2016. Retrieved July 2, 2016.
 FINAL FANTASY FFXV. 4Gamer.net. April 9, 2016. Archived from the original on October 22, 2016. Retrieved February 13, 2018.
 Sahdev, Ishaan June 4, 2015. Final Fantasy XV Is Not Final Fantasy Versus XIII Any More, Says Director. Siliconera. Archived from the original on June 4, 2015. Retrieved June 4, 2015.
 30 Minutos Con Hajime Tabata 30 Minutes with Hajime Tabata in Spanish. La Capital Ovidada. October 13, 2016. Archived from the original on October 22, 2016. Retrieved October 22, 2016.
 Corriae, Alexa Ray March 31, 2016. 15 New Things We Learned from Final Fantasy 15s Director. GameSpot. Archived from the original on March 31, 2016. Retrieved March 31, 2016.
 Smith, Mat August 26, 2017. The director of Final Fantasy XV isnt finished yet. Engadget. Archived from the original on August 26, 2017. Retrieved August 26, 2017.
 Kishimoto, Mat March 30, 2016. Final Fantasy XV Out 930, Feature Film and Anime Series Announced. PlayStation Blog. Archived from the original on March 31, 2016. Retrieved March 31, 2016.
 Les dessous dune compilation : Brotherhood, Kingsglaive... The following is a compilation: Brotherhood, Kingsglaive... in French. Final Fantasy Dream. April 4, 2016. Archived from the original on April 4, 2016. Retrieved April 4, 2016.
 Corriae, Alexa Ray September 13, 2016. The Story Behind Brotherhood, the Final Fantasy XV Anime. GameSpot. Archived from the original on September 14, 2016. Retrieved September 13, 2016.
 Goldfarb, Andrew March 30, 2016. Final Fantasy 15 Brotherhood Anime Series Announced. IGN. Archived from the original on April 12, 2016. Retrieved March 31, 2016.
 Square Enix, A1 Pictures September 17, 2016. Brotherhood Final Fantasy XV  Episode 5: The Warmth of Light Video in Japanese. Crunchyroll.
 Sato March 30, 2016. Kingsglaive: Final Fantasy XV Revealed As An Advent ChildrenStyle CGI Film. Siliconera. Archived from the original on March 31, 2016. Retrieved March 31, 2016.
 Ike, Sato March 31, 2016. Kingsglaive: Final Fantasy XV Is Being Directed By Advent Children Director. Siliconera. Archived from the original on March 31, 2016. Retrieved March 31, 2016.
 Shreler, Jason June 20, 2016. An InDepth QA with the Director of Final Fantasy XV. Kotaku. Archived from the original on June 20, 2016. Retrieved June 20, 2016.
 Lada, Jenni March 30, 2016. Final Fantasy XV Platinum Demo Follows Young Noctis In His Dreams. Siliconera. Archived from the original on March 31, 2016. Retrieved March 31, 2016.
 Final Fantasy XV Spinoff Game Justice Monsters Five Arrives on iOSAndroid on August 30. Anime News Network. August 28, 2016. Archived from the original on August 28, 2016. Retrieved August 28, 2016.
 Romano, Sal December 27, 2016. Justice Monsters Five to end service on March 27. Gematsu. Archived from the original on December 27, 2016. Retrieved April 2, 2017.
 Matulef, Jeffrey June 14, 2016. Final Fantasy 15 is getting a beatemup spinoff. Eurogamer. Archived from the original on June 15, 2016. Retrieved June 15, 2016.
 Salbato, Mike September 20, 2017. Monster of the Deep: Noctis Meets Your Name Here in TGS Trailer. RPGFan. Archived from the original on September 21, 2017. Retrieved September 21, 2017.
 Romano, Sal November 7, 2016. Final Fantasy XV mobile MMO in development at Mobile Strike developer Machine Zone. Gematsu. Archived from the original on November 7, 2016. Retrieved November 7, 2016.
 Romano, Sal June 28, 2017. New Final Fantasy XV Spinoff Out Now. GameSpot. Archived from the original on June 29, 2017. Retrieved June 29, 2017.
 Romano, Sal February 20, 2015. Final Fantasy XV: Episode Duscae demo special reveal live stream  full report. Gematsu. Archived from the original on February 20, 2015. Retrieved February 20, 2015.
 Saed, Sherif February 5, 2015. Final Fantasy 15 Episode Duscae demo releases on March 17. VG247. Archived from the original on August 8, 2015. Retrieved February 6, 2015.
 Martin, Liam February 16, 2015. Final Fantasy XV demo playable at launch of Type0. Digital Spy. Archived from the original on September 7, 2015. Retrieved February 20, 2015.
 Tabata, Hajime October 14, 2015. The English Translation. Final Fantasy XV Forums. Archived from the original on November 4, 2015. Retrieved November 4, 2015.
 Romano, Sal March 23, 2016. Final Fantasy XV to be localized in Latin American Spanish and Brazilian Portuguese Update. Gematsu. Archived from the original on March 23, 2016. Retrieved March 23, 2016.
 Romano, Sal August 15, 2016. Final Fantasy XV delayed to November 29. Gematsu. Archived from the original on August 15, 2016. Retrieved August 15, 2016.
 Donaldson, Alex September 1, 2016. Final Fantasy 15 interview: Tabata talks delays, Versus, fan expectation and more. VG247. Archived from the original on September 1, 2016. Retrieved September 2, 2016.
 Makuch, Eddie November 21, 2016. Final Fantasy 15s Day One Update Detailed. GameSpot. Archived from the original on November 22, 2016. Retrieved November 22, 2016.
 Romano, Sal March 30, 2016. Final Fantasy XV release date, Platinum Demo, anime, CG movie, and more officially announced. Gematsu. Archived from the original on March 31, 2016. Retrieved March 31, 2016.
 Kingsglaive, Brotherhood : dtails  Japan Expo Kingsglaive, Brotherhood: details at Japan Expo in French. FFRing. July 8, 2016. Archived from the original on July 8, 2016. Retrieved July 9, 2016.
 Robinson, Martin January 16, 2018. Final Fantasy 15 Royal Edition announced, PC version dated. Eurogamer. Archived from the original on January 16, 2018. Retrieved January 16, 2018.
 PCXV WINDOWS EDITION 20184K8KHDR10FFXV. Famitsu. August 21, 2017. Archived from the original on August 23, 2017. Retrieved August 23, 2017.
 Hood, Vic August 21, 2017. Final Fantasy 15 confirmed for PC early 2018. Eurogamer. Archived from the original on August 21, 2017. Retrieved August 23, 2017.
 Ike, Sato January 29, 2018. Final Fantasy XV: Pocket Edition Launches On February 9 For iOS And Android. Siliconera. Archived from the original on January 29, 2018. Retrieved January 29, 2018.
 Final Fantasy Pocket Editionhas formally launched on iOS and Android. XPEC Entertainment. February 13, 2018. Archived from the original on February 13, 2018. Retrieved February 13, 2018.
 SummerTimeStudio January 20, 2018. SummerTimeStudio  January 20, 2018  11920IT in Japanese. Facebook. Archived from the original on February 13, 2018. Retrieved February 13, 2018.
 FF15WindowsMOD Pocket Edition in Japanese. Dengeki Online. August 22, 2017. Archived from the original on November 2, 2017. Retrieved February 13, 2018.
 Romano, Sal October 27, 2016. Final Fantasy XV goes gold, Omen CG trailer and DLC details. Gematsu. Archived from the original on October 27, 2016. Retrieved October 27, 2016.
 XV in Japanese. Game Watch Impress. April 2, 2016. Archived from the original on May 6, 2016. Retrieved May 6, 2016.
 Tabata, Hajime December 7, 2016. Announcing Free Updates for Final Fantasy XV. Square Enix. Archived from the original on December 19, 2016. Retrieved February 2, 2017.
 Hall, Charlie March 11, 2017. Handson Final Fantasy 15: Episode Gladiolus. Polygon. Archived from the original on March 11, 2017. Retrieved March 11, 2017.
 Romano, Sal June 19, 2017. Final Fantasy XV DLC Episode Prompto trailer. Gematsu. Archived from the original on June 19, 2017. Retrieved June 19, 2017.
 Romano, Sal October 30, 2017. Final Fantasy XV DLC Episode Ignis launches December 13. Gematsu. Archived from the original on December 18, 2017. Retrieved December 18, 2017.
 Lumb, David November 6, 2017. Final Fantasy XV multiplayer DLC pushed back to November 15th. Engadget. Archived from the original on January 2, 2018. Retrieved February 13, 2018.
 Arnold, Cory September 20, 2017. Final Fantasy XV multiplayer expansion Comrades launches on Halloween. Destructoid. Archived from the original on September 23, 2017. Retrieved September 23, 2017.
 Donaldson, Alex November 8, 2018. Final Fantasy 15 shakeup: director quits, DLC cancelled and PC support stripped back. VG247. Archived from the original on November 8, 2018. Retrieved November 8, 2018.
 Romano, Sal September 23, 2017. Final Fantasy XV development to continue through to 2018. Gematsu. Archived from the original on September 23, 2017. Retrieved September 23, 2017.
 Romano, Sal November 7, 2018. Final Fantasy XV DLC Episode Ardyn launches in March 2019. Gematsu. Archived from the original on November 8, 2018. Retrieved November 8, 2018.
 Romano, Sal November 7, 2018. Final Fantasy XV DLCs Episode Aranea, Episode Lunafreya, and Episode Noctis cancelled. Gematsu. Archived from the original on November 8, 2018. Retrieved November 8, 2018.
 Final Fantasy XV Marks Second Anniversary With New Content And An Important Announcement. Square Enix. November 7, 2018. Archived from the original on November 8, 2018. Retrieved November 8, 2018.
 Romano, Sal January 19, 2017. Final Fantasy XV ingame Moogle Chocobo Carnival begins January 24. Gematsu. Archived from the original on June 5, 2017. Retrieved January 1, 2018.
 Knezevic, Kevin August 31, 2017. Final Fantasy 15s August Update Out Now, Adds Assassins Creed Crossover Event. GameSpot. Archived from the original on December 23, 2017. Retrieved January 1, 2018.
 Final Fantasy XV for PlayStation 4 Reviews. Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on November 28, 2016. Retrieved November 28, 2016.
 Final Fantasy XV for Xbox One Reviews. Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on November 21, 2016. Retrieved November 28, 2016.
 Final Fantasy XV: Windows Edition for PC Reviews. Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Retrieved March 27, 2018.
 Final Fantasy XV: Royal Edition for PlayStation 4 Reviews. Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Retrieved August 25, 2018.
 Carter, Chris November 28, 2016. Review: Final Fantasy XV. Destructoid. Archived from the original on December 11, 2016. Retrieved November 28, 2016.
 L. Patterson, Mollie December 6, 2016. Final Fantasy XV review. Electronic Gaming Monthly. Archived from the original on December 21, 2016. Retrieved December 6, 2016.
 Romano, Sal December 13, 2016. Famitsu Review Scores: Issue 1463. Gematsu. Archived from the original on December 14, 2016. Retrieved December 14, 2016.
 Reiner, Andrew November 28, 2016. Final Fantasy XV  Cruising To Success. Game Informer. Archived from the original on November 28, 2016. Retrieved November 28, 2016.
 Leack, Jonathan December 2, 2016. Final Fantasy XV Review. Game Revolution. Archived from the original on December 20, 2016. Retrieved December 2, 2016.
 Brown, Peter November 28, 2016. Final Fantasy XV Review. GameSpot. Archived from the original on November 29, 2016. Retrieved November 28, 2016.
 Roberts, David November 28, 2016. Final Fantasy XV Review. GamesRadar. Archived from the original on December 12, 2016. Retrieved November 28, 2016.
 Ingenito, Vince November 28, 2016. Final Fantasy XV Review. IGN. Archived from the original on December 5, 2016. Retrieved November 28, 2016.
 Kollar, Philip November 28, 2016. Final Fantasy XV Review. Polygon. Archived from the original on December 13, 2016. Retrieved November 28, 2016.
 McKeand, Kirk December 5, 2016. Final Fantasy XV review  did it Noct our socks off?. Digital Spy. Archived from the original on December 6, 2016. Retrieved December 5, 2016.
 Beck, Adam December 1, 2016. Review: Final Fantasy XV. Hardcore Gamer. Archived from the original on December 2, 2016. Retrieved December 1, 2016.
 149201620174Gamer in Japanese. 4Gamer.net. December 28, 2016. Archived from the original on December 28, 2016. Retrieved February 15, 2018.
 Romano, Sal December 7, 2016. Media Create Sales: 112816  12416. Gematsu. Archived from the original on December 7, 2016. Retrieved December 7, 2016.
 Final Fantasy XV sees 88 sales drop in second week, Yakuza 6 takes top spot. December 14, 2016. Archived from the original on December 22, 2016. Retrieved December 21, 2016.
 Dunning, Jason January 11, 2017. apanese Sales Chart: PS4 Sales up, Final Fantasy XV Crosses 900,000. PlayStation Lifestyle. Archived from the original on February 15, 2017. Retrieved February 15, 2018.
 Duwell, Ron January 26, 2017. Final Fantasy XV breaks a million copies in Japan, twice as many sales as every other PS4 hit. TechnoBuffalo. Archived from the original on January 27, 2017. Retrieved February 15, 2018.
 Dayus, Oscar December 5, 2016. Top 10 UK Sales Chart: Final Fantasy 15 is Series SecondBiggest Launch, But Cant Beat FIFA. GameSpot. Archived from the original on December 5, 2016. Retrieved December 5, 2016.
 Minotti, Mike January 19, 2017. December 2016 NPD: Final Fantasy XV shows it has a new recipe for franchises sales. VentureBeat. Archived from the original on February 1, 2018. Retrieved February 15, 2018.
 Sato, Ike February 7, 2017. Final Fantasy XV Broke Even With Development Costs On Its Launch Day. Archived from the original on February 7, 2017. Retrieved February 7, 2017.
 Sato December 1, 2016. Final Fantasy XV Tops 5 Million In Worldwide Shipment; FastestSelling Title From The Series. Siliconera. Archived from the original on December 1, 2016. Retrieved December 1, 2016.
 Farokhmanesh, Megan March 1, 2017. Final Fantasy XV was Square Enixs last chance for the series. The Verge. Archived from the original on October 1, 2017. Retrieved February 15, 2018.
 Final Fantasy XV Games Physical Shipments, Digital Sales Exceed 6 Million Copies. January 10, 2017. Archived from the original on January 11, 2017. Retrieved January 10, 2017.
 Final Fantasy XV And Rise of the Tomb Raider Helped Square Enix Bring In Big Sales And Profits. Siliconera. Archived from the original on May 12, 2017. Retrieved May 12, 2017.
  in Japanese. Mantan Web. January 1, 2018. Archived from the original on January 9, 2018. Retrieved February 15, 2018.
 Imtiaz, Khurram. Final Fantasy XV Sales Exceed 8.1 Million Units Worldwide. GearNuke. Retrieved 7 September 2018.
 RPG Site Awards 2016: Readers Choice in Detail  RPG Site. RPG Site. January 3, 2017. Archived from the original on January 18, 2017. Retrieved January 17, 2017.
 RPGFan Feature  Games of the Year 2016: Best RPG of 2016. RPGFan. Archived from the original on February 2, 2017. Retrieved January 20, 2017.
 Best RPG  Best of 2016 Awards Peoples Choice  IGN. IGN. Archived from the original on January 7, 2017. Retrieved January 6, 2017.
 Massongill, Justin January 12, 2017. The Winners: PlayStation.Blog Game of the Year 2016. PlayStation.Blog. Archived from the original on January 17, 2017. Retrieved January 17, 2017.
 Wallace, Kimberley January 7, 2018. The 2017 RPG Of The Year Awards. Game Informer. p. 2. Archived from the original on January 8, 2018. Retrieved January 10, 2018.
 NAVGTR Awards 2016. National Academy of Video Game Trade Reviewers. Archived from the original on May 11, 2017.
 2017 Awards. Game Audio Network Guild. Retrieved April 16, 2018.
 Gaito, Eri November 13, 2017. Golden Joystick Awards 2017 Nominees. Best in Slot. Retrieved January 10, 2018.
 Makuch, Eddie December 8, 2017. The Game Awards 2017 Winners Headlined By Zelda: Breath Of The Wilds Game Of The Year. GameSpot. Retrieved January 10, 2018.
 Khan, Zubi August 21, 2017. Gamescom 2017 Award Nominees. CGM. Retrieved January 23, 2018.
 deAlessandri, Marie March 15, 2018. Hellblade: Senuas Sacrifice at forefront of BAFTA Games Awards nominations. The Market for Computer  Video Games. Retrieved March 16, 2018.
 Makedonski, Brett April 12, 2018. BAFTA names What Remains of Edith Finch its best game of 2017. Destructoid. Retrieved April 13, 2018.
Notes
 XV Fainaru Fantaj Fifutn in Japanese
 XIII Fainaru Fantaj Verusasu Stn in Japanese
External links

Book: Final Fantasy XV
Wikiquote has quotations related to: Final Fantasy XV
Official website Edit this at Wikidata
Final Fantasy XV on IMDb
vte
Final Fantasy series
vte
Fabula Nova Crystallis Final Fantasy
Samsung Galaxy S5 Vector.svg2010s portalWPVG icon 2016.svgVideo games portalFinal Fantasy wordmark.svgFinal Fantasy portal
Categories: 2016 video gamesAction roleplaying video gamesCancelled PlayStation 3 gamesFinal Fantasy video gamesFinal Fantasy XVInvasions in fictionJapanese roleplaying video gamesFiction about magicOpen world video gamesPlayStation 4 gamesPlayStation 4 Pro enhanced gamesScience fantasy video gamesSingleplayer video gamesTheft in fictionTransmedia storytellingVideo games scored by Yoko ShimomuraVideo games developed in JapanVideo games developed in SwedenVideo games developed in TaiwanVideo games with downloadable contentWars in fictionWindows gamesXbox One gamesSteam Workshop games

Page semiprotected
The Legend of Zelda
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
This article is about the video game series. For the video game, see The Legend of Zelda video game. For other uses, see The Legend of Zelda disambiguation.
LoZ redirects here. For other uses, see LoZ disambiguation.
The Legend of Zelda
The text The Legend of Zelda
The logo of the series, first appearing in A Link to the Past 1991
GenresActionadventure
Developers
Nintendo
Capcom
Vanpool
Grezzo
PublishersNintendo
Creators
Shigeru Miyamoto
Takashi Tezuka
ComposersKoji Kondo
Platforms
Listshow
Platforms of originFamily Computer Disk System
First releaseThe Legend of Zelda
February 21, 1986
Latest releaseHyrule Warriors: Definitive Edition
May 18, 2018
The Legend of Zeldaa is a actionadventure videogame series created by Japanese game designers Shigeru Miyamoto and Takashi Tezuka. It is primarily developed and published by Nintendo, although some portable installments and rereleases have been outsourced to Capcom, Vanpool and Grezzo. The series gameplay incorporates elements of action, adventure and puzzlesolving games.

The series centers on Link, the playable character and chief protagonist. Link is often given the task of rescuing Princess Zelda and the kingdom of Hyrule from Ganon, who is the principal antagonist of the series; however, other settings and antagonists have appeared in several games. The plots commonly involve a relic known as the Triforce, a set of three omnipotent golden triangles. The protagonist in each game is usually not the same incarnation of Link, but a few exceptions exist.

Since the original The Legend of Zelda was released in 1986, the series has expanded to include 19 entries on all of Nintendos major game consoles, as well as a number of spinoffs. An American animated TV series based on the games aired in 1989 and individual manga adaptations commissioned by Nintendo have been produced in Japan since 1997. The Legend of Zelda is one of Nintendos most prominent and successful franchises, selling over 80 million copies as of 2017; many of its games are considered by critics to be among the greatest video games of all time.


Contents
1Overview
1.1Gameplay
1.2Audio
1.3Inspiration
2Setting
2.1Fictional chronology
3Characters
3.1Link
3.2Princess Zelda
3.3Ganon
4History
4.11980s
4.21990s
4.32000s
4.42010s
5Other games
5.1CDi games
5.2LCD games
5.3Cancelled games
5.4Spinoff games
5.5Crossovers
6Reception and legacy
6.1Impact
7Other media
7.1TV series
7.2Print media
7.3Music
7.4Cancelled films
7.5Board games
8Notes
9References
10External links
Overview
Gameplay
The Legend of Zelda games feature a mixture of puzzles, action, adventurebattle gameplay, and exploration. These elements have remained constant throughout the series, but with refinements and additions featured in each new game. Later games in the series also include stealth gameplay, where the player must avoid enemies while proceeding through a level, as well as racing elements. Although the games can be beaten with a minimal amount of exploration and side quests, the player is frequently rewarded with helpful items or increased abilities for solving puzzles or exploring hidden areas. Some items are consistent and appear many times throughout the series such as bombs and bomb flowers, which can be used both as weapons and to open blocked or hidden doorways; boomerangs, which can kill or paralyze enemies; keys for locked doors; magic swords, shields, and bows and arrows, while others are unique to a single game. Though the games contain many roleplaying elements Zelda II: The Adventure of Link is the only one to include an experience system, they emphasize straightforward hack and slashstyle combat over the strategic, turnbased or active time combat of games like Final Fantasy. The games roleplaying elements, however, have led to much debate over whether or not the Zelda games should be classified as action roleplaying games, a genre on which the series has had a strong influence.1

Every game in the main Zelda series has consisted of three principal areas: an overworld in which movement is multidirectional, allowing the player some degree of freedom of action; areas of interaction with other characters merely caves or hidden rooms in the first game, but expanding to entire towns and cities in subsequent games in which the player gains special items or advice; and dungeons, areas of labyrinthine layout, usually underground, comprising a wide range of difficult enemies, bosses, and items. Each dungeon usually has one major item inside, which is usually essential for solving many of the puzzles within that dungeon and often plays a crucial role in defeating that dungeons boss, as well as progressing through the game. In nearly every Zelda game, navigating a dungeon is aided by locating a map, which reveals its layout, and a magic compass, which reveals the location of significant and smaller items such as keys and equipment. In later games, the series includes a special big key that will unlock the door to battle the dungeons boss enemy and open the item chest.

In most Zelda games, the players life meter is represented as a line of hearts. The life meter is replenished a number of different ways, including picking up hearts left by defeated enemies or destroyed objects, fairies or springs located in specific locations, or consuming items such as potions or food. Fairies can be kept in bottles and act as extra lives, reviving the player if they run out of hearts. Players are able to extend their life meter by finding heartshaped crystals called Heart Containers. Full heart containers are usually received at the end of dungeons and dropped by the dungeon boss. Smaller Pieces of Heart are awarded for completing certain side quests or found hidden around the game world in various places, and require a certain number usually four to form a full heart container.

The games pioneered a number of features that were to become industry standards. The original Legend of Zelda was the first console game with a save function that enabled players to stop playing and then resume later. The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time introduced a targeting system that simplified 3D combat.

Audio

Koji Kondo, the series original composer and current sound director, in 2007
Games in The Legend of Zelda series frequently feature ingame musical instruments, particularly in musical puzzles, which are widespread.2 Often, instruments trigger game events: for example, the recorder in The Legend of Zelda can reveal secret areas, as well as warp Link to the Dungeon entrances. This warping with music feature has also been used in A Link to the Past and Links Awakening. In Ocarina of Time, playing instruments is a core part of the game, with the player needing to play the instrument through the use of the game controller to succeed.3 Ocarina of Time is one of the first contemporary nondance titles to feature musicmaking as part of its gameplay,4 using music as a heuristic device and requiring the player to utilise songs to progress in the game5  a game mechanic that is also present in Majoras Mask.6

The Legend of Zelda Theme is a recurring piece of music that was created for the first game of the franchise. The composer and sound director of the series, Koji Kondo, initially planned to use Maurice Ravels Bolro as the games title theme, but was forced to change it when he learned, late in the games development cycle, that the copyright for the orchestral piece had not yet expired. As a result, Kondo wrote a new arrangement of the overworld theme within one day.7 The Zelda Theme has topped ScrewAttacks Top Ten Videogame Themes Ever list.8

Up until Breath of the Wild, the Legend of Zelda series avoided using voice acting in speaking roles, relying instead on written dialogue. Series producer Eiji Aonuma previously stated that as Link is entirely mute, having the other characters speak while Link remains silent would be offputting.9 Instead of theme music for different locations, Breath of the Wild plays natural ambience around the player as main sounds, in addition to some minimalist piano music.10

Inspiration
The Legend of Zelda was principally inspired by Shigeru Miyamotos explorations as a young boy in the hillsides, forests, and caves surrounding his childhood home in Sonobe, Japan where he ventured into forests with secluded lakes, caves, and rural villages. According to Miyamoto, one of his most memorable experiences was the discovery of a cave entrance in the middle of the woods. After some hesitation, he apprehensively entered the cave, and explored its depths with the aid of a lantern. Miyamoto has referred to the creation of the Zelda games as an attempt to bring to life a miniature garden for players to play with in each game of the series.11

Hearing of American novelist F. Scott Fitzgeralds wife Zelda, Miyamoto thought the name sounded pleasant and significant.12 Paying tribute, he chose to name the princess after her, and titled it The Legend of Zelda.

Link and the fairy were inspired by Peter Pan and Tinker Bell.1314

The Master Sword was inspired by the Arthurian legend, first mentioned in Welsh mythology; Mabinogion as; Caledfwlch Excalibur.1516 The similarities lay with the swords being kept in stone until the chosen one hero takes it out to save the land.

Setting
Main article: Universe of The Legend of Zelda
An overhead view of a young boy in a green tunic battling creatures.
The Legend of Zelda on the NES.
The Legend of Zelda takes place predominantly in a medieval Western Europeinspired fantasy land called Hyrule, which has developed a deep history and wide geography over the series many releases. Much of the backstory of the creation of Hyrule was revealed in the games A Link to the Past, Ocarina of Time, The Wind Waker, Twilight Princess, Skyward Sword, and A Link Between Worlds. Hyrules principal inhabitants are pointyeared humanoids called Hylians, which include the player character, Link, and the eponymous princess, Zelda.

According to the ingame backstories, the world of Hyrule was created by the three golden goddesses: Din, Farore and Nayru.17 Before departing, the goddesses left a sacred artifact called the Triforce, which could grant powers to the user. It physically manifests itself as three golden triangles in which each embodies one of the goddesses virtues: Power, Courage and Wisdom.18 However, because the Triforce has no will of its own and it could not judge between good and evil, it would grant any wish indiscriminately.1920 Because of this, it was placed within an alternate world called the Sacred Realm or the Golden Land until one worthy of its power and has balanced virtues of Power, Wisdom, and Courage in their heart could obtain it, in its entirety. If a person is not of a balanced heart, the triforce part that the user mostly believes in will stay with that person and the remainder will seek out others. In order to master and control the triforce as a whole, the user must get the other parts found in other individuals and bring them together to reunite them. The Sacred Realm can itself be affected by the heart of those who enters it: those who are pure will make it a paradise, while those who are evil will transform it into a dark realm.21

In Skyward Sword, the Triforce was sought by a demon king named Demise,22 and after a long battle, Demise was sealed away within the Temple of the goddess Hylia, guardian of the Triforce.1823 Hylia, placing the Hylians on a floating island called Skyloft in the sky to protect them, orchestrated a means to stop the demon from escaping: creating the Goddess Sword later becoming the Master Sword for her chosen hero24 and discarding her divinity to be reborn among the people of Skyloft.25 In time, Zelda and Link the reborn Hylia and her predestined warrior, enacted the goddess plan and Demise was destroyed. However, Demise vowed that his rage would be reborn and forever plague those descended from Link and Zelda.26 That prophecy came to fruition in Ocarina of Time, when Ganondorfs attempt to get the Triforce scattered it with him gaining the Triforce of Power. The Triforce of Wisdom ended up with the Hylian princesses descended from Zelda, each named after her, while the Triforce of Courage is passed to a youth named Link across generations. While the Triforces of Power and Wisdom have been part of the series since the original The Legend of Zelda, it was only in Zelda II: The Adventure of Link that the Triforce of Courage was first introduced, being obtained by Link at the end of his quest. The Triforce, or even a piece of it, is not always distributed as a whole. Such as in The Wind Waker, Link must find all the pieces called Triforce Shards of the Triforce of Courage before he can return to Hyrule. Even in the original The Legend of Zelda, Zelda breaks her Triforce of Wisdom into 8 pieces for Link to find, before she was captured by Ganon.

The fictional universe established by the Zelda games sets the stage for each adventure. Some games take place in different lands with their own backstories. Termina and Lorule serve as parallel worlds to Hyrule,27 Hytopia is a connected kingdom,28 and Koholint is an island far away from Hyrule that appears to be part of a dream.29

Fictional chronology
The Legend of Zelda series chronology
Skyward Sword
The Minish Cap
Four Swords
Ocarina of Time
The Decline of HyruleThe Twilight RealmA New World
A Link to the Past
Links Awakening30
Oracle of Seasons  Ages
A Link Between Worlds
Tri Force Heroes
The Legend of Zelda
The Adventure of Link
Majoras Mask
Twilight Princess
Four Swords Adventures
The Wind Waker
Phantom Hourglass
Spirit Tracks
Final timeline30
Breath of the Wild
The chronology of the Legend of Zelda series was a subject of much debate among fans until an official timeline was released within the Hyrule Historia collectors book, which was first released in Japan in December 2011.3132 Prior to its release, producers confirmed the existence of a confidential document, which connected all the games.3334 Certain materials and developer statements once partially established an official timeline of the released installments. Zelda II: The Adventure of Link is a direct sequel to the original The Legend of Zelda, and takes place several years later.3536 The third game, A Link to the Past, is a prequel to the first two games,373839 and is directly followed by Links Awakening.4041 Ocarina of Time is a prequel that takes the story many centuries back; according to character designer Satoru Takizawa, it was meant to implicitly tell the story of the Imprisoning War from the manual of A Link to the Past, with Majoras Mask directly following its ending.4243 Skyward Sword is then a prequel to Ocarina of Time.44 Twilight Princess is set more than 100 years after Ocarina of Time.4546

The Wind Waker is parallel, and takes place in the other timeline branch, more than a century after the adult era of Ocarina of Time.4546 Phantom Hourglass is a continuation of the story from The Wind Waker,47 and is followed by Spirit Tracks, which is set about 100 years later on a supercontinent far away from the setting of The Wind Waker.48 At the time of its release, Four Swords for the Game Boy Advance was considered the oldest tale in the series chronology, with Four Swords Adventures set sometime after its events.49 The Minish Cap precedes the two games, telling of the origins of villain Vaati and the creation of the Four Sword.50 A Link Between Worlds takes place six generations after Link to the Past. Important events that occur in the game include the Triforce being reunited, and Ganon being resurrected.51

Nintendos 2011 timeline announcement subsequently posits that following Ocarina of Time, the timeline splits into three alternate routes: in one, Link fails to defeat Ganon, leading into the Imprisoning War and A Link to the Past, Oracle of Seasons and Oracle of Ages, Links Awakening, The Legend of Zelda and The Adventure of Link. In the second and third, Link is successful, leading to a timeline split between his childhood when Zelda sends him back in time so he can use the wisdom he has gained to warn the Zelda in the past of the horrifying fate of Hyrule and adulthood where the Zelda from the future lives on to try and rebuild the kingdom. His childhood continues with Majoras Mask, followed by Twilight Princess and Four Swords Adventures. The timeline from his adult life continues into Wind Waker, Phantom Hourglass and Spirit Tracks.

In the early 2000s, Nintendo of America released a timeline on the official website of the series, which interpreted all stories up to the Oracle games as the adventures of a single protagonist named Link.52 At one point, translator Dan Owsen and his coworkers at Nintendo of America had conceived another complete timeline and intended to make it available online. However, the Japanese series developers rejected the idea so the timeline would be kept open to the imagination of the players.53

In 2018, Nintendo revealed that Breath of the Wild officially takes place after all previous games in the series without specifying a connection to any of the three timelines, and moved Links Awakening to take place before Oracle of Seasons and Oracle of Ages.54

Characters
See also: Characters in The Legend of Zelda series
Link
Main article: Link The Legend of Zelda
The central protagonist of The Legend of Zelda series, Link is the name of various young men who characteristically wear a green tunic and a pointed cap, and are the bearers of the Triforce of Courage. In most games, the player can give Link a different name before the start of the adventure, and he will be referred by that given name throughout by the nonplayer characters NPCs. The various Links each have a special title, such as Hero of Time, Hero of the Winds or Hero chosen by the gods. Like many silent protagonists in video games, Link does not speak, only producing grunts, yells, or similar sounds. Despite the player not seeing the dialogue, it is referenced secondhand by ingame characters, showing that he is not, in fact, mute. Link is shown as a silent protagonist so that the audience is able to have their own thoughts as to how their Link would answer the characters instead of him having scripted responses.

Princess Zelda
Main article: Princess Zelda
Princess Zelda is the princess of Hyrule and the guardian of the Triforce of Wisdom. Her name is present in many of her female ancestors and descendants. While most games require Link to save Zelda from Ganon, she sometimes plays a supporting role in battle, using magical powers and weapons such as Light Arrows to aid Link. With the exception of the CDi games which were not official Nintendo games, she was not playable in the main series until Spirit Tracks, where she becomes a spirit and can possess a Phantom Knight that can be controlled by the player. Zelda appears under various other aliases and alter egos, including Sheik in Ocarina of Time and Tetra in The Wind Waker and Phantom Hourglass. In Skyward Sword, it is revealed that the Zelda of that game is a reincarnation of the goddess Hylia, whose power flows through the royal bloodline. The name Zelda derives from the American novelist Zelda Fitzgerald.55

Ganon
Main article: Ganon
Ganon, also known as Ganondorf in his humanoid form, is the main antagonist and the final boss in the majority of The Legend of Zelda games. In the series, Ganondorf is the leader of a race of desert brigands called the Gerudo, which consists entirely of female warriors save for one man born every one hundred years. He is significantly taller than other human NPCs, but his looks vary between games, often taking the form of a monstrous anthropomorphic boar. His specific motives vary from game to game, but most often his plans include him kidnapping Princess Zelda and planning to achieve domination of Hyrule and presumably the world beyond it. To this end, he seeks the Triforce, a powerful magical relic. He often possesses a portion of the Triforce called the Triforce of Power, which gives him great strength. However, it is often not enough to accomplish his ends, leading him to hunt the remaining Triforce pieces. Unlike Link, Zelda, and most other recurring characters, he is actually the same person in every game, with the exception of Four Swords Adventures, where he is a reincarnation of the original. In each game the battles with him are different and he fights using different styles. The game Skyward Sword indicates that Ganon is a reincarnation of an evil deity known as Demise.

History
Timeline of release years
1986The Legend of Zelda
1987The Adventure of Link
1988
1989
1990
1991A Link to the Past
1992
1993Links Awakening
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998Ocarina of Time
Links Awakening DX
1999
2000Majoras Mask
2001Oracle of Seasons and Oracle of Ages
2002Four Swords
The Wind Waker
2003The Legend of Zelda: Collectors Edition
2004Four Swords Adventures
The Minish Cap
2005
2006Twilight Princess
2007Phantom Hourglass
2008
2009Spirit Tracks
2010
2011Ocarina of Time 3D
Skyward Sword
2012
2013The Wind Waker HD
A Link Between Worlds
2014
2015Majoras Mask 3D
Tri Force Heroes
2016Twilight Princess HD
2017Breath of the Wild
1980s

The first Legend of Zelda game appeared on the Famicom Disk System in 1986. It was later converted into a cartridge game for the American NES.
The Legend of Zelda, the first game of the series, was first released in Japan on February 21, 1986, on the Famicom Disk System.56 A cartridge version, using batterybacked memory, was released in the United States on August 22, 1987, and Europe on November 27, 1987. The game features a Second Quest, accessible either upon completing the game, or by registering ones name as ZELDA when starting a new quest. The Second Quest features different dungeons and item placement, and more difficult enemies.57

The second game, Zelda II: The Adventure of Link, was released for the Famicom Disk System in Japan on January 14, 1987,56 and for the Nintendo Entertainment System in Europe in November 1988 and North America in December 1988. The game exchanged the topdown perspective for sidescrolling though the topdown point of view was retained for overworld areas, and introduced RPG elements such as experience points not used previously or thereafter in the series. The Legend of Zelda and Zelda II were released in goldcoloured cartridges instead of the consoles regular grey cartridges. Both were rereleased in the final years of the Nintendo Entertainment System with grey cartridges.

1990s
Four years later, The Legend of Zelda: A Link to the Past returned to the topdown view under a 34 perspective, and added the concept of an alternate dimension, the Dark World. The game was released for the Super NES on November 21, 1991.56 It was later rereleased for the Game Boy Advance on March 14, 2003, in North America, on a cartridge with Four Swords,56 the first multiplayer Zelda, and then through Nintendos Virtual Console service on January 22, 2007. In addition, both this game unchanged, except for being converted into a downloadable format58 and an exclusive loosely based sequel which used the same game engine called BS Zelda no Densetsu Inishie no Sekiban59 were released on the Satellaview in Japan on March 2, 1997, and March 30, 1997, respectively.

In 1994, near the end of the Famicoms lifespan, the original Famicom game was rereleased in cartridge format.60 A modified version, BS Zelda no Densetsu, was released for the Super Famicoms satellitebased expansion, Satellaview, on August 6, 1995, in Japan. A second Satellaview game, BS Zelda no Densetsu MAP2 was released for the Satellaview on December 30, 1995. Both games featured rearranged dungeons, an altered overworld, and new voiceacted plotlines.61

The next game, Links Awakening, is the first Zelda for Nintendos Game Boy handheld, and the first set outside Hyrule and to exclude Princess Zelda. It was released in 1993, and rereleased, in full color, as a launch game for the Game Boy Color in 1998 as Links Awakening DX. This rerelease features additions such as an extra colorbased dungeon and a photo shop that allows interaction with the Game Boy Printer.

A young boy holds a sword in a dungeon lit by a candle
Ocarina of Time, the first 3Dstyled game of the franchise
After a fiveyear hiatus, the series made the transition to 3D with Ocarina of Time for the Nintendo 64, which was released in November 1998. This game, initially known as Zelda 64, retains the core gameplay of the previous 2D games, and was very successful commercially and critically. It is considered by many critics and gamers to be the best video game of all time, and ranks highly on IGN and EGMs greatest games of all time lists, as well as scoring perfect scores in several video game publications.62 In February 2006, it was ranked by Nintendo Power as the best game released for a Nintendo console.63 The game was originally developed for the poorly selling, Japaneseonly Nintendo 64DD, but was ported to cartridge format when the 64DD hardware was delayed.64 A new gameplay mechanic, lockon targeting called Ztargeting as that is the controller button used, is used in the game, which focuses the camera on a nearby target and alters the players actions relative to that target.65 Such mechanics allow precise sword fighting in a 3D space. The game heavily uses contextsensitive button play, which enabled the player to control various actions with Link using only one button on the Nintendo 64s game pad. Each action was handled slightly differently but all used the A button to perform. For instance, standing next to a block and pressing A made Link grab it enabling him to pushpull it, but moving forwards into a block and pressing A allowed Link to climb the block. The B button was used only as an attack button. The game featured the first appearance of Links horse, Epona, allowing Link to travel quickly across land and fire arrows from horseback. Those who preordered the game received a goldcoloured cartridge in a limited edition box with a golden plastic card affixed, reading Collectors Edition.66 In some stores that had this Collectors Edition quickly sell out, a small and rare Zelda pin was given instead. It is the sword and shield emblem with Zelda written on it. Very few of them are known to remain.

Ocarina of Time was rereleased on the GameCube in 2002, when it was offered as a preorder incentive for The Wind Waker in the U.S., Canada and Japan.67 Europe continued to receive it free in every copy of The Wind Waker, except for the discounted Players Choice version. It includes what is widely believed to be the remnants of a cancelled 64DD expansion for Ocarina of Time known as Ura Zelda in early development. Named Ocarina of Time Master Quest, the game was given the addition of revamped, more difficult dungeon layouts.67 Ocarina of Time was included as part of the Collectors Edition for the GameCube in 2003.68 It is now available through the Wiis Virtual Console service.69 In 2011, Nintendo released a new version of the game in stereoscopic 3D for the Nintendo 3DS, The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time 3D. In July 2015, Nintendo rereleased it for the Wii U Virtual Console.70

2000s
Ocarina of Times followup, Majoras Mask, was released in April 2000. It uses the same 3D game engine as the previous game,71 and added a timebased concept, in which Link, the protagonist, relives the events of three days as many times as needed to complete the games objectives. It was originally called Zelda Gaiden,72 a Japanese title that translates as Zelda Side story. Gameplay changed significantly; in addition to the timelimit, Link can use masks to transform into creatures with unique abilities. While Majoras Mask retains the graphical style of Ocarina of Time, it is also a departure, particularly in its atmosphere. It features motionblur, unlike its predecessor. The game is darker,71 dealing with death and tragedy in a manner not previously seen in the series, and has a sense of impending doom, as a large moon slowly descends upon the land of Termina to destroy all life. All copies of Majoras Mask are gold cartridges. A limited Collectors Edition lenticular cartridge label was offered as the preorder incentive. Copies of the game that are not collectors editions feature a normal sticker cartridge label. Majoras Mask is included in the Collectors Edition,68 and is available on the Virtual Console, as well as a 3D port for the portable 3DS console.

The next two games, Oracle of Seasons and Oracle of Ages, were released simultaneously for the Game Boy Color, and interact using passwords73 or a Game Link Cable.74 After one game has been completed, the player is given a password that allows the other game to be played as a sequel.73 They were developed by Flagship in conjunction with Nintendo, with supervision from Miyamoto. After the team experimented with porting the original The Legend of Zelda to the Game Boy Color, they decided to make an original trilogy75 to be called the Triforce Series.76 When the password system linking the three games proved too troublesome, the concept was reduced to two games at Miyamotos suggestion.77 These two games became Oracle of Ages, which is more puzzlebased, and Oracle of Seasons, which is more actionoriented.78

When Nintendo revealed the GameCube on August 24, 2000, the day before Nintendos SpaceWorld 2000 exposition,79 a software demonstration showed a realistically styled realtime duel between Ganondorf and Link. Fans and the media speculated that the battle might be from a Zelda game in development.80 At Spaceworld 2001, Nintendo showed a celshaded Zelda game, later released as The Wind Waker in December 2002. Due to poor reception, nothing further was shown until a playable demonstration was ready. Miyamoto felt The Wind Waker would extend Zeldas reach to all ages.8182 The gameplay centres on controlling wind with a baton called the Wind Waker and sailing a small boat around an islandfilled ocean, retaining similar gameplay mechanics as the previous 3D games in the series.

Following the release of The Wind Waker came The Legend of Zelda: Collectors Edition, which included the original The Legend of Zelda, Zelda II, Ocarina of Time, Majoras Mask, and a demo of The Wind Waker. GameSpot noted that Majoras Mask suffered from a frame rate which appeared choppier and inconsistencies in the audio.83 This compilation was never sold commercially, and originally could only be obtained by purchasing a GameCube bundled with the disc8485 in North America, Europe and Australia, by registering a GameCube and two games at Nintendo.com,84 or by subscribing or renewing a subscription to Nintendo Power in North America or Club Nintendo in Sweden.84 In the UK, 1000 copies were made available through the Club Nintendo Stars Catalogue program.85 After these were quickly claimed, Nintendo gave a copy to customers who mailed in proof of purchases from select GameCube games.85

The next game released in the series was Four Swords Adventures for the GameCube, which was released in early 2004 in Japan and America, and January 2005 in Europe. Based on the handheld Four Swords, Four Swords Adventures was another deviation from previous Zelda gameplay, focusing on levelbased and multiplayer gameplay. The game contains 24 levels and a map screen; there is no connecting overworld. For multiplayer features, each player must use a Game Boy Advance system linked to the GameCube via a Nintendo GameCube  Game Boy Advance link cable. The game features a singleplayer campaign, in which using a Game Boy Advance is optional.

Four Swords Adventures includes two gameplay modes: Hyrulean Adventure, with a plot and gameplay similar to other Zelda games, and Shadow Battle, in which multiple Links, played by multiple players, battle each other. The Japanese and Korean versions include an exclusive third segment, Navi Trackers originally designed as the standalone game Tetras Trackers, which contains spoken dialogue for most of the characters, unlike other games in The Legend of Zelda series.

In November 2004 in Japan and Europe, and January 2005 in America, Nintendo released The Minish Cap for the Game Boy Advance. In The Minish Cap Link can shrink in size using a mystical, sentient hat named Ezlo. While shrunk, he can see previously explored parts of a dungeon from a different perspective, and enter areas through otherwiseimpassable openings.

A man is on a horse. In the foreground, an imp rides a wolf.
Promotional artwork for Twilight Princess
In November 2006, Twilight Princess was released as the first Zelda game on the Wii, and later, in December 2006, as the last official Nintendo game for the GameCube, the console for which it was originally developed. The Wii version features a reversed world where everything that is in the west on the GameCube is in the east on the Wii, and vice versa. The display is mirrored in order to make Link righthanded, to make use of the Wii remote feel more natural. The game chronicles the struggle of an older Link to clear the troubles of the interacting Twilight Realm, a mysterious force that appears around Hyrule. When he enters this realm, he is transformed into a wolf, and loses the ability to use his sword, shield or other items, but gains other abilities such as sharpened senses from his new form. Twilight Princess includes an incarnation of Links horse, Epona, for fast transportation, and features mounted battle scenarios including boss battles that were not seen in previous games. Twilight Princess diverted from the cel shading of Wind Waker and went for graphics featuring more detailed textures, giving the game a darker atmosphere, thus making it feel more adult than previous games.

At the 2006 Game Developers Conference, a trailer for Phantom Hourglass for the Nintendo DS was shown. It revealed traditional topdown Zelda gameplay optimised for the DS features, with a celshaded 3d graphical style similar to The Wind Waker. At E3 2006, Nintendo confirmed the games status as a direct sequel to The Wind Waker,86 and released an extensive playable demo, including a multiplayer mode with capture the flag elements. Phantom Hourglass was released on June 23, 2007, in Japan, October 1, 2007, in North America and October 19, 2007, in Europe.

The next Legend of Zelda for the DS, The Legend of Zelda: Spirit Tracks, was released December 7, 2009, in North America and December 11, 2009, in the UK. In this game, the spirit tracks, railroads which chain an ancient evil, are disappearing from Hyrule. Zelda and Link go to the Spirit Tower the ethereal point of convergence for the tracks to find out why. But villains steal Zeldas body for the resurrection of the Demon King. Rendered disembodied, Zelda is left a spirit, and only Link and a certain few sages can see her. Together they go on a quest to restore the spirit tracks, defeat the Demon King, and return Zelda to her body. Using a modified engine of that used in Phantom Hourglass, the notably new feature in this game is that the Phantom Guardians seen in Phantom Hourglass are, through a series of events, periodically controllable. It was the first time in the series that both Link  Zelda work together on the quest.

2010s
In April 2008, Miyamoto stated that the Zelda team is forming again to work on new games.87 Miyamoto clarified in July that the Zelda team had been working on a new Zelda game for the Wii.88 In January 2010, Nintendo Executive Satoru Iwata stated that the game would be coming out at some time in 2010, and confirmed that the game would make use of the Wiis MotionPlus feature, which had been announced too late to be integrated into the Twilight Princess Wii release. The games subtitle was announced at E3 in 2010 as Skyward Sword, but its release was delayed to 2011.89 The game, the earliest in the Legend of Zelda timeline, reveals the origins of Hyrule, Ganon and many elements featured in previous games. It was released on November 20, 2011; the first run included a 25th Anniversary CD of fully orchestrated music from various Zelda games, including Skyward Sword.

In addition, Nintendo celebrated the 25th anniversary of The Legend of Zelda game by releasing a Zelda game for all its current consoles in 2011: Links Awakening in the 3DSs Virtual Console on June 7, Ocarina of Time 3D for the 3DS in midJune, Four Swords Anniversary Edition90 from September 28, 2011, to February 20, 2012, as a free DSiWare download and Skyward Sword for the Wii, which was released on November 18, 2011, in Europe; on November 20, 2011, in the United States; and on November 24, 2011, in Australia. A limited edition Zelda 25th anniversary 3DS was released on December 1, 2011, in Australia.91

The Legend of Zelda: The Wind Waker HD, a remaster of the original GameCube game, was released by Nintendo on September 20, 2013, digitally on the Nintendo eShop in North America with a retail release on September 26 in Japan, October 4 in North America and Europe, and October 5 in Australia. A month later, Nintendo released The Legend of Zelda: A Link Between Worlds for the Nintendo 3DS, which takes place in the same setting as A Link to the Past.9293

Nintendo released a second 3DS version, The Legend of Zelda: Majoras Mask 3D, in North America and Europe on February 13, 2015, and in Japan and Australia on February 14, 2015.

At E3 2015, Nintendo announced The Legend of Zelda: Tri Force Heroes, a cooperative multiplayer game released for the 3DS in October 2015.94 The Legend of Zelda: Twilight Princess HD, a highdefinition remastering of Twilight Princess, was released for the Wii U in March 2016.95

Nintendo showcased a demo reel at E3 2011, which depicted Link fighting a monster in HD.96 In January 2013, Nintendo revealed that a new Legend of Zelda game was being planned for the Wii U.97 The game was officially teased at E3 2014, and was scheduled to be released in 2015. However, in March 2015, the game was delayed to 2016.98 In April 2016, the game was delayed again to 2017; it was also announced that it would be simultaneously released on the Wii U and Nintendo Switch.99 At E3 2016, the game was showcased under the title The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild.100 The game was released on March 3, 2017.101

Other games
CDi games

The Zelda games for the Philips CDi are infamous for their poor quality and are not canon.
Main article: CDi games from The Legend of Zelda series
A series of video games was developed and released for the Philips CDi in the early 1990s as a product of a compromise between Philips and Nintendo, after the companies failed to develop a CDROM peripheral for the Super NES. Created independently with no observation by or influence from Nintendo, the games are Link: The Faces of Evil and Zelda: The Wand of Gamelon, together with Zeldas Adventure. Nintendo never acknowledged them in the Zelda timeline, and they are considered to be in a separate, selfcontained canon. These games are widely acknowledged to be the worst installments in the series.102

LCD games
Main article: LCD games from The Legend of Zelda series
Three Zeldathemed LCD games were created between 1989 and 1992. The Zelda version of Nintendos Game  Watch series was released first in August 1989 as a dualscreen handheld electronic game similar in appearance to todays Nintendo DS. It was rereleased in 1998 as a Toymax, Inc. Mini Classic and was later included as an unlockable extra in Game  Watch Gallery 4, a 2002 compilation for the Game Boy Advance. While the Game  Watch Zelda was developed inhouse by Nintendo, the subsequent two LCD games were developed by third parties under license by Nintendo. In October 1989, The Legend of Zelda was developed by Nelsonic as part of its Game Watch line. This game was an actual digital watch with primitive gameplay based on the original Legend of Zelda. In 1992, Epoch Co. developed Zelda no Densetsu: Kamigami no Triforce for its Barcode Battler II console. The game employed cardscanning technology similar to the laterreleased Nintendo eReader.

Cancelled games
Throughout the lifespan of The Legend of Zelda series, a number of games including main series games as well as rereleases and spinoffs in varying states of completeness have had their releases cancelled. Perhaps the earliest of these was Gottliebs The Legend of Zelda Pinball Machine cancelled 1993. After securing a license from Nintendo to produce two Nintendofranchisebased pinball machines, pinball designer Jon Norris was tasked with designing the table. Before it was completed, Gottlieb decided to repurpose the game with an American Gladiators theme. Licensing for this version ultimately fell through and the game was released as simply Gladiators November 1993.103

In 1998, Nintendo cancelled The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time Ura. Originally intended as an expansion disk for Ocarina of Time on the Nintendo 64DD, poor sales figures for the N64DD system led Nintendo to cancel its plans for the release. In 2002, Nintendo released a bonus disc called The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time Master Quest. It contained emulated versions of Ocarina of Time and Ocarina of Time Master Quest with a number of modifications originally planned for release in Ocarina of Time Ura including GUI textures and text modified to reflect the GameCube.citation needed

In 2001, under license from Nintendo, Capcom cancelled the release of The Legend of Zelda: Mystical Seed of Courage for Game Boy Color. Working with a Capcom team, Yoshiki Okamoto was originally tasked with designing a series of three Zelda games for the Game Boy Color.104 Referred to as the Triforce Series,105 the games were known as The Legend of Zelda: The Mysterious Acorn: Chapter of Power, Chapter of Wisdom, and Chapter of Courage in Japan106 and The Legend of Zelda: Mystical Seed of Power, Mystical Seed of Wisdom, and Mystical Seed of Courage in the US.107 The games were to interact using a password system,105 but the limitations of this system and the difficulty of coordinating three games proved too complicated, so the team scaled back to two games at Miyamotos suggestion.108109 The Legend of Zelda: Oracle of Seasons was adapted from Mystical Seed of Power, The Legend of Zelda: Oracle of Ages was adapted from Mystical Seed of Wisdom, and Mystical Seed of Courage was cancelled.105

Before its 2006 release, both Link and Samus from the Metroid series were planned to be playable characters for the Wii version of Marvel: Ultimate Alliance. However, they didnt make the final release because they werent Marvel characters.110

In 2011, an unnamed Zelda 25th Anniversary Compilation was cancelled. To celebrate the 25th anniversary of the series, Nintendo of America originally had planned to release a compilation of games together for the Wii, similar to the collectors edition disc released for the GameCube in 2003. However Nintendo of Japans president Satoru Iwata and Shigeru Miyamoto disagreed in releasing it, believing it would be too similar to the Super Mario 25th Anniversary game released in 2010.111

Spinoff games
As the franchise has grown in popularity, several games have been released that are set within or star a minor character from the universe of The Legend of Zelda but are not directly connected to the main The Legend of Zelda series. Both map versions of the game BS Zelda no Densetsu for the Satellaview released in August and December 1995 could be considered spinoffs due to the fact that they star the Hero of Light portrayed by either the Satellaviews male or female avatar as opposed to Link as the protagonist of Hyrule. A third Satellaview game released in March 1997, BS Zelda no Densetsu Inishie no Sekiban BS The Legend of Zelda: Ancient Stone Tablets could also be considered a spinoff for the same reason. Other spinoff games include FreshlyPicked Tingles Rosy Rupeeland for the Nintendo DS  an RPG released in September 2006 in Japan Summer of 2007 in the UK to star supporting character Tingle. A second Tingle game is Tingles Balloon Fight DS for the Nintendo DS. Here Tingle again stars in this spinoff arcade style platformer, released in April 2007 only in Japan and available solely to Platinum Club Nintendo members. In addition to games in which Link does not star as the protagonist, games such as the shooter game, Links Crossbow Training for the Wii, have been considered spinoffs due to the lack of a traditional Save Hyrule plotline. Released in November 2007 as a bundle with the Wii Zapper, this game allows players to assume the identity of Link as he progresses through a series of tests to perfect his crossbow marksmanship. Color Changing Tingles Love Balloon Trip was released in Japan in 2009 as a sequel to FreshlyPicked Tingles Rosy Rupeeland. Hyrule Warriors, a crossover game combining the setting of Nintendos The Legend of Zelda series and the gameplay of Tecmo Koeis Dynasty Warriors series, was announced for the Wii U video game system in December 2013 and was released in North America in September 2014. Hyrule Warriors Legends, a version for the Nintendo 3DS containing more content and gameplay modifications, was released in March 2016. To commemorate the launch of the My Nintendo loyalty program in March 2016, Nintendo released My Nintendo Picross: The Legend of Zelda: Twilight Princess, a Picross puzzle game developed by Jupiter for download to the Nintendo 3DS.112113

Crossovers
The Legend of Zelda series has crossedover into a number of other Nintendo and third party video games. Most prominent of the collaborations would be in the Super Smash Bros. series of fighting games published by Nintendo. Link appears as a fighter in Super Smash Bros. for the Nintendo 64, the first entry in the series, and is part of the roster in all subsequent releases in the series as well. Zelda, who is able to transform into Sheik as well, Ganondorf, and Young Link the child version of Link from Ocarina of Time were added to the player roster for Super Smash Bros. Melee, and appeared in all subsequent releases except for Young Link, who is later replaced by Toon Link from The Wind Waker, in subsequent releases Super Smash Bros. Brawl and Super Smash Bros. for Nintendo 3DS and Wii U however, both Young Link and Toon Link appear in the fifth installment, Super Smash Bros. Ultimate. Other elements from the series, such as locations and items, are also included throughout the Smash Bros. series. Outside of the series, Nintendo allowed for the use of Link as a playable character exclusively in the GameCube release of Namcos fighting game Soulcalibur II.114

Link, using a design based on Skyward Sword, appears as a playable character in Mario Kart 8 via downloadable content, along with a Hyrule Circuit racetrack themed on The Legend of Zelda series.115 The first pack is named after the series.
In Sonic Lost World, a DLC stage based on The Legend of Zelda series was released in March 2014, named The Legend of Zelda Zone. While built around the core gameplay mechanics of Sonic Lost World, The Legend of Zelda Zone incorporates some elements from the Zelda series, including a heartbased vitality meter, rupee collection, and a miniature dungeon to explore.116
Reception and legacy
Aggregate review scores
As of March 22, 2017.
GameGameRankingsMetacritic
The Legend of ZeldaNES 84117
GBA 79118GBA 84119
The Adventure of LinkNES 78120
GBA 69121GBA 73122
A Link to the PastSNES 93123
GBA 92124GBA 95125
Links AwakeningGB 90126
GBC 91127
Ocarina of TimeN64 98128
GC 90129
3DS 94130N64 99131
GC 91132
3DS 94133
Majoras MaskN64 92134
3DS 90135N64 95136
3DS 89137
Oracle of Seasons and AgesSeasons 91138
Ages 92139
Four SwordsNDS 85140NDS 85141
The Wind WakerGC 94142
Wii U 91143GC 96144
Wii U 90145
Four Swords AdventuresGC 85146GC 86147
The Minish CapGBA 90148GBA 89149
Twilight PrincessGC 95150
Wii 95151
Wii U 86152GC 96153
Wii 95154
Wii U 86155
Phantom HourglassNDS 89156NDS 90157
Spirit TracksNDS 87158NDS 87159
Skyward SwordWii 93160Wii 93161
A Link Between Worlds3DS 911623DS 91163
Tri Force Heroes3DS 721643DS 73165
Breath of the WildNS 97166
Wii U 97167NS 97168
Wii U 96169
Lifetodate number units shipped, in millions
GameYearSales
The Legend of Zelda1986 NES6.51170
The Adventure of Link1987 NES4.38170
A Link to the Past1991 SNES4.61170
Links Awakening1993 GB3.83170
Ocarina of Time1998 N647.6170
Majoras Mask2000 N643.36170
Oracle of Seasons and Oracle of Ages2001 GBC3.96170
The Wind Waker2002 GC4.43170
The Minish Cap2004 GBA1.76170
Twilight Princess2006 GCWii8.85n 1172
Phantom Hourglass2007 DS4.76170
Spirit Tracks2009 DS2.96170
Skyward Sword2011 Wii3.67170
A Link Between Worlds2013 3DS2.9170
Tri Force Heroes2015 3DS1.14173
Breath of the Wild2017 Wii UNS10.40n 2
The Legend of Zelda series has received outstanding levels of acclaim from critics and the public. Ocarina of Time, The Wind Waker, Skyward Sword, and Breath of the Wild have each received a perfect 4040 score 1010 by four reviewers by Japanese Famitsu magazine,175176 making Zelda one of the few series with multiple perfect scores. Ocarina of Time was even listed by Guinness World Records as the highestrated video game in history, citing its Metacritic score of 99 out of 100.177 Computer and Video Games awarded The Wind Waker and Twilight Princess a score of 1010.178179 A Link to the Past has won Gold Award from Electronic Gaming Monthly. In Nintendo Powers Top 200 countdown in 2004, Ocarina of Time took first place, and seven other Zelda games placed in the top 40.180 Twilight Princess was named Game of the Year by XPlay, GameTrailers, 1UP, Electronic Gaming Monthly, Spacey Awards, Game Informer, GameSpy, Nintendo Power, IGN, and many other websites. The editors of review aggregator websites GameRankings, IGN and Metacritic have all given Ocarina of Time their highest aggregate scores.181 Game Informer has awarded The Wind Waker, Twilight Princess, Skyward Sword, A Link Between Worlds and Breath of the Wild with scores of 1010. Phantom Hourglass was named DS Game of the Year by IGN and GameSpy.182183 Airing December 10, 2011, Spike TVs annual Video Game Awards gave the series the first ever Hall of Fame Award, which Miyamoto accepted in person.184 Ocarina of Time and its use of melodic themes to identify different game regions has been called a reverse of Richard Wagners use of leitmotifs to identify characters and themes.185 Ocarina of Time was so well received that sales increased for real ocarinas.186 IGN praised the music of Majoras Mask for its brilliance despite its heavy use of MIDI. It has been ranked the seventhgreatest game by Electronic Gaming Monthly, whereas Ocarina of Time was ranked eighth.187188 The series won GameFAQs Best Series Ever competition.189

As of April 2018, The Legend of Zelda franchise has sold over 80 million copies, with the original The Legend of Zelda being the fourth bestselling NES game of all time.190191 The series was ranked as the 64th top game collectively by Next Generation in 1996.192 According to British film magazine Empire, with the most vividlyrealised world and the most varied gameplay of any game on any console, Zelda is a solid bet for the best game series ever.193

Impact
Multiple members of the game industry have expressed how Zelda games have impacted them. Rockstar Games founder and Grand Theft Auto director, Dan Houser, stated, Anyone who makes 3D games who says theyve not borrowed something from Mario or Zelda on the Nintendo 64 is lying.194 Rockstar founder and Grand Theft Auto director Sam Houser also cited the influence of Zelda, describing Grand Theft Auto III as Zelda meets Goodfellas.195 kami director Hideki Kamiya Capcom, PlatinumGames states that he has been influenced by The Legend of Zelda series in developing the game, citing The Legend of Zelda: A Link to the Past as his favorite game of all time.196 Soul Reaver and Uncharted director, Amy Hennig Crystal Dynamics, Naughty Dog, cited Zelda as inspiration for the Legacy of Kain series, noting A Link to the Pasts influence on Blood Omen and Ocarina of Times influence on Soul Reaver.197 Soul Reaver and Uncharted creator, Richard Lemarchand Crystal Dynamics, Naughty Dog, cited A Link to the Pasts approach to combining gameplay with storytelling as inspiration for Soul Reaver.198 Wing Commander and Star Citizen director, Chris Roberts Origin Systems, Cloud Imperium Games, cited Zelda as an influence on his action roleplaying game, Times of Lore.199

Souls creator Hidetaka Miyazaki FromSoftware named A Link To The Past as one of his favorite roleplaying video games.200 According to Miyazaki, The Legend of Zelda became a sort of textbook for 3D action games.201 Ico director Fumito Ueda Team Ico cited Zelda as an influence on Shadow of the Colossus.202 Fable series director Peter Molyneux Lionhead Studios, Microsoft Studios stated that Twilight Princess is one of his favorite games. I just feel its jawdropping and its use of the hardware was brilliant. And Ive played that game through several times, he said to TechRadar.203 Darksiders director David L. Adams Vigil Games cited Zelda as an influence on his work.204 Prince of Persia and Assassins Creed director Raphael Lacoste Ubisoft cited The Wind Waker as an influence on Assassins Creed IV: Black Flag.205 CD Projekt Red The Witcher, Cyberpunk 2077 cited the Zelda series as an influence on The Witcher series, including The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt.206 Final Fantasy and The 3rd Birthday director Hajime Tabata Square Enix cited Ocarina of Time as inspiration for the seamless open world of Final Fantasy XV.207

Other media

This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. April 2016 Learn how and when to remove this template message
Main article: List of The Legend of Zelda media
TV series
Main article: The Legend of Zelda TV series
A 13episode American animated TV series, adapted by DiC and distributed by Viacom Enterprises, aired in 1989. The animated Zelda shorts were broadcast each Friday, instead of the usual Super Mario Bros. cartoon which was aired during the rest of the week. The series loosely follows the two NES Zelda games the original The Legend of Zelda and The Adventure of Link, mixing settings and characters from those games with original creations. The shows older incarnations of both Link and Zelda appear in various episodes of Captain N: The Game Master during its second season.

Print media
Valiant Comics released a short series of comics featuring characters and settings from the Zelda cartoon as part of their Nintendo Comics System line. Manga adaptations of many entries in the series, including A Link to the Past, Ocarina of Time, Majoras Mask, Oracle of Seasons and Oracle of Ages, Four Swords Adventures, The Minish Cap, and Phantom Hourglass, have been produced under license from Nintendo, mostly in Japan. These cartoons are usually not involved with the chronology of the actual games.clarification needed

A number of official books, novels, and gamebooks have been released based on the series as well. The earliest was Moblins Magic Spear, published in 1989 by Western Publishing under their Golden Books Family Entertainment division and written by Jack C. Harris. It took place sometime during the first game. Two gamebooks were published as part of the Nintendo Adventure Books series by Archway, both of which were written by Matt Wayne. The first was The Crystal Trap which focuses more on Zelda and the second was The Shadow Prince. Both were released in 1992. A novel based on Ocarina of Time was released in 1999, written by Jason R. Rich and published by Sybex Inc. under their Pathways to Adventure series. Another two gamebooks were released as part of the You Decide on the Adventure series published by Scholastic. The first book was based on Oracle of Seasons and was released in 2001. The second, based on Oracle of Ages, was released in 2002. Both were written by Craig Wessel. In 2006, Scholastic released a novel as part of their Nintendo Heroes series, Link and the Portal of Doom. It was written by Tracey West and was set shortly after the events of Ocarina of Time.

In 2011, to coincide with the 25th anniversary of the series, an art book was published exclusively in Japan under the name Hyrule Historia by Shogakukan. It contains concept art from the seriess conception to the release of Skyward Sword in 2011 and multiple essays about the production of the games, as well as an overarching timeline of the series. It also includes a prequel manga to Skyward Sword by Zelda manga duo Akira Himekawa. The book received an international release by publisher Dark Horse Comics on January 29, 2013;208 it took the number one spot on Amazons sales chart, taking the spot away from E. L. Jamess 50 Shades of Grey trilogy.209 Dark Horse released The Legend of Zelda: Art  Artifacts, a followup art book to Hyrule Historia containing additional artwork and interviews,210211 in North America on February 21, 2017, and in Europe on February 23, 2017.212

Music
Taking place in Cologne, Germany, on September 23, 2010, the video game music concert Symphonic Legends focused on music from Nintendo and, among others, featured games such as The Legend of Zelda. Following an intermission, the second half of the concert was entirely dedicated to an expansive symphonic poem dedicated to the series. The 35minute epic tells the story of Links evolution from child to hero.213214

To celebrate the 25th anniversary of the series in 2011, Nintendo commissioned an original symphony, The Legend of Zelda: Symphony of the Goddesses. The show was originally performed in the fall of 2011 in Los Angeles and consists of live performances of much of the music from the series.215 It has since been scheduled for 18 shows so far throughout the United States and Canada.215216 Nintendo released a CD, The Legend of Zelda 25th Anniversary Special Orchestra CD. Featuring eight tracks from live performances of the symphony, the CD is included alongside the special edition of The Legend of Zelda: Skyward Sword for the Wii. Nintendo would later celebrate The Legend of Zeldas 30th anniversary with an album which was released in Japan in February 2017.217

Cancelled films
In 2007, Imagi Animation Studios, who provided the animation for TMNT and Astro Boy, created a pitch reel for a computeranimated The Legend of Zelda movie. Nintendo did not take the studio up on their offer due to the failure of the liveaction movie adaption of Super Mario Bros.218

In 2013, Aonuma stated that, if development of a film were to move forward, the company would want to use the opportunity to embrace audience interaction in some capacity.219220

Board games
The Legend of Zeldathemed Monopoly board game was released in the United States on September 15, 2014.221 A Clue board game in the style of The Legend of Zelda series was released in June 2017.222 A UNOstyled The Legend of Zelda game was announced in February 2018 for release exclusively at GameStop in North America.223

Notes
 In Japanese:  Zeruda no Densetsu
Group n
 Twilight Princess sales breakdown:
GameCube version: 1.59 million171
Wii version: 7.26 millioncitation needed
 Breath of the Wild sales breakdown:
Wii U version: 1.08 million170
Switch version: 9.32 million174
References
 Barton, Matt 2008. Dungeons  Desktops: The History of Computer RolePlaying Games. A K Peters, Ltd. pp. 20910, 216, 385. ISBN 1568814119. Retrieved September 8, 2010.
 Pichlmair, Martin; Kayali, Fares 2007. Levels of Sound: On the Principles of Interactivity in Music Video Games PDF. Situated Play, Proceedings of DiGRA 2007 Conference.
 Lane, Pete February 26, 1999. Review: Legend of Zelda. BBC News. Retrieved April 6, 2008.
 McDonald, Glenn February 26, 1999. A Brief Timeline of Video Game Music. GameSpot. Archived from the original on October 18, 2007. Retrieved April 6, 2008.
 Whalen, Zach 2007. Play Along  An Approach to Videogame Music. Game Studies. 4 1. Retrieved April 6, 2008.
 Mirabella, Fran. Legend of Zelda: Majoras Mask. IGN. Retrieved April 6, 2008.
 MacDonald, Mark May 3, 2005. Zelda Exposed from 1UP.com. 1UP.com. IGN. Archived from the original on October 2, 2015. Retrieved October 2, 2015.
 ScrewAttacks Top Ten Video Game Themes Ever. ScrewAttacks Top 10. ScrewAttack. October 17, 2008. Retrieved November 23, 2008.
 Zelda producer says Link may never talk. GamesRadar. Retrieved July 22, 2011.
 Lloyd, Rod June 15, 2016. Breath of the Wilds Soundtrack Makes Heavy Use of Piano and Environmental Sounds. Retrieved June 16, 2016.
 Andrew Vestal September 14, 2000. The History of Zelda. GameSpot. Archived from the original on August 31, 2011. Retrieved September 25, 2006.
 Todd Mowatt. In the Game: Nintendos Shigeru Miyamoto. Amazon.com. Archived from the original on December 20, 2007. Retrieved September 25, 2006.
 Life, Nintendo November 5, 2012. The Legend of Zeldas Link Was Inspired By Walt Disneys Peter Pan.
 Link design inspired by Peter Pan, name explained. Nintendo Everything. November 3, 2012.
 Zelda and Mythology: Arthurian Legend  Zelda Dungeon. Archived from the original on June 22, 2016.
 Mabinogion.
 Nintendo November 21, 1998. The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time. Nintendo 64. Nintendo. Great Deku Tree: Before time began, before spirits and life existed... Three golden goddesses descended upon the chaos that was Hyrule... Din, the Goddess of Power... Nayru, the Goddess of Wisdom... Farore, the Goddess of Courage... Din... With her strong flaming arms, she cultivated the land and created the red earth. Nayru... Poured her wisdom onto the earth and gave the spirit of law to the world. Farore... With her rich soul, produced all life forms who would uphold the law.
 Shigeru Miyamoto, Eiji Aonuma January 29, 2013. The Legend of Zelda: Hyrule Historia. Milwaukie, Oregon: Dark Horse. p. 76. ISBN 9781616550417.
 Nintendo November 21, 1998. The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time. Nintendo 64. Nintendo. Zelda: If someone with a righteous heart makes a wish, it will lead Hyrule into a golden age of prosperity. If one with an evil mind has his wish granted, the world will be consumed by evil... That is what is foretold...
 Shigeru Miyamoto, Eiji Aonuma January 29, 2013. The Legend of Zelda: Hyrule Historia. Milwaukie, Oregon: Dark Horse. p. 70. ISBN 9781616550417.
 Nintendo November 21, 1998. The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time. Nintendo 64. Nintendo. Sheik: The resting place of the sacred triangle, the Sacred Realm, is a mirror that reflects what is in the heart...the heart of one who enters it... If an evil heart, the Realm will become full of evil; if pure, the Realm will become a paradise.
 Nintendo November 18, 2011. The Legend of Zelda: Skyward Sword. Wii. Nintendo. Zelda: In his thirst to make the world his own, Demise readied a massive army of monsters for war. He sought to take the Triforce for himself by force.
 Nintendo November 21, 1998. The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time. Nintendo 64. Nintendo. Introduction: Handed down by the gods of old, this power gave its holder the means to make any desire a reality. Such was the might of the ultimate power that the old ones placed it in the care of the goddess.
 Nintendo November 18, 2011. The Legend of Zelda: Skyward Sword. Wii. Nintendo. Zelda: She made the spirit that resides in your sword to serve a single purpose: to assist her chosen hero on his mission.
 Nintendo November 18, 2011. The Legend of Zelda: Skyward Sword. Wii. Nintendo. Zelda: Knowing this power was her last and only hope, the goddess gave up her divine powers and her immortal form.
 Nintendo November 18, 2011. The Legend of Zelda: Skyward Sword. Wii. Nintendo. Demise: I will rise again. Those like you... Those who share the blood of the goddess and the spirit of the hero... They are eternally bound to this curse. An incarnation of my hatred shall ever follow your kind, dooming them to wander a bloodsoaked sea of darkness for all time!
 Nintendo, ed. 2000. The Legend of Zelda: Majoras Mask manual. Nintendo. p. 6.
 Most games in The Legend of Zelda series have a connection to Hyrule. Does the land of Hytopia connect to Hyrule in any way?. Nintendo. Retrieved July 20, 2016.
 The Great Hyrule Encyclopedia K. Nintendo. Archived from the original on March 26, 2009. Retrieved June 7, 2009.
 Wong, Alistair August 5, 2018. The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild Has Been Added To The Series Official Timeline. Siliconera. Retrieved August 5, 2018.
 Official Legend of Zelda Timeline Revealed. December 22, 2011. Archived from the original on April 26, 2012.
 Fred Dutton May 3, 2010. Zelda Timeline Explained. Official Nintendo Magazine. Future Publishing Limited. Archived from the original on October 31, 2014. Retrieved March 2, 2015.
 Shigeru Miyamoto Interview. Super PLAY in Swedish. Medstrms Datafrlag AB 403. March 2003. Archived from the original on February 8, 2012. Retrieved September 24, 2006.
 Long, Neil; Scullion, Chris. Game On  The Legend of Zelda: Skyward Sword. Official Nintendo Magazine. Future Publishing Limited July 2010: 51.
 Nintendo EAD January 14, 1987. The Legend of Zelda 2: Link no Bken. Famicom Disk System. Nintendo Co., Ltd. Several years after Gannon was destroyed, Link learns from Impa about another sleeping Princess Zelda.
 Nintendo EAD December 1988. Zelda II: The Adventure of Link. Nintendo Entertainment System. Nintendo of America, Inc. After Ganon was destroyed, Impa told Link a sleeping spell was cast on Princess Zelda.
 Zelda no Densetsu: Kamigami no Triforce  Back Cover in Japanese. Nintendo Co., Ltd. via MobyGames. November 21, 1991. Retrieved June 10, 2010.   This time, the stage is set a long time before Links exploits, an era when Hyrule was still one kingdom.
 The Legend of Zelda: A Link to the Past  Back Cover. Nintendo of America, Inc. via MobyGames. April 13, 1992. Retrieved June 10, 2010. The predecessors of Link and Zelda face monsters on the march when a menacing magician takes over the kingdom.
 Dengeki Nintendo 64. Dengeki Nintendo 64. MediaWorks, Inc. January 1999. Shigeru Miyamoto:   Ocarina of Time, A Link to the Past, then comes the original one and The Adventure of Link in turn.
 Nintendo, ed 1993. The Legend of Zelda: Links Awakening instruction manual. Nintendo. pp. 34. Though you fulfilled the Hyrulian prophecy of the Legendary Hero and destroyed the evil tyrant Ganon, the land of Hyrule enjoyed only a precarious peace. Who knows what threats may arise from Ganons ashes? the restless people murmured as they knitted their brows and shook their heads. Ever vigilant, you decided to journey away from Hyrule on a quest for enlightenment, in search of wisdom that would make you better able to withstand the next threat to your homeland.
 Zelda . Nintendo Co., Ltd. Retrieved June 10, 2010.
 The Legend of Zelda: A Link to the Past Instruction Booklet. Nintendo of America, Inc. April 13, 1992. pp. 56. Many centuries have passed since the Imprisoning War.
 !. Hobo Nikkan Itoi Shinbun. November 26, 1998. Retrieved June 9, 2010. Satoru Takizawa:   The story this time is not truly original, its from the previous SNES version and tells of the Seal War of the Seven Sages.
 Neil Long, Chris Scullion. Game On  The Legend of Zelda: Skyward Sword. Official Nintendo Magazine. Future Publishing Limited July 2010: 51. Eiji Aonuma: I have already talked to Mr. Miyamoto about this so I am comfortable in releasing this information  this title Skyward Sword takes place before Ocarina of Time.
 Long interview with Eiji Aonuma. nindori.com. Nintendo DREAM. Feb 2007. Archived from the original on January 27, 2007. Retrieved June 4, 2010.  ... 7  It is a world 100 and something years after Ocarina of Time. ... The Wind Waker is parallel. In Ocarina of Time, Link leaps to a world seven years later, defeats Ganon, and then returns to the child era, right? Twilight Princess is the world 100 and something years after peace is restored in the child era.
 Fennec Fox December 6, 2002. Interview With Nintendos Shigeru Miyamoto and Eiji Aonuma. GamePro. GamePro Media. Archived from the original on July 28, 2010. Retrieved May 30, 2010.
 The Legend of Zelda: Phantom Hourglass. Zelda Universe. Nintendo of America, Inc. Archived from the original on April 30, 2010. Retrieved June 10, 2010.
 Walton, Mark November 20, 2009. The Legend of Zelda: Spirit Tracks Eiji Aonuma Interview. GameSpot. CBS Interactive. Retrieved May 30, 2010. Eiji Aonuma: Yes, it is actually a sequel and it is taking place about 100 years after the world of the game Phantom Hourglass.
 Billy Berghammer May 17, 2004. A Legend Of Zelda: The Eiji Aonuma Interview. Game Informer Online. Game Informer Magazine. Archived from the original on May 7, 2008. Retrieved November 11, 2009.
 Zelda: The interview!. Nintendo of Europe GmbH. November 17, 2004. Archived from the original on October 12, 2007. Retrieved May 30, 2010. NoE: How does the Minish Cap fit into the Zelda chronology? Is it a prequel to the upcoming The Legend of Zelda: Four Swords Adventures on GameCube? Aonuma: Yes, this title takes place prior to The Legend of Zelda: Four Swords Adventures, and tells the secret of the birth of the Four Sword.
 Jose Otero August 7, 2013. New Details for The Legend of Zelda: A Link Between Worlds. IGN. Retrieved August 7, 2013.
 The Library: Hall of Time. Nintendo of America, Inc. Archived from the original on October 2, 2002.
 East, Thomas May 23, 2011. Ocarina writer wanted to put Zelda timeline online. Official Nintendo Magazine. Future Publishing Limited. Archived from the original on October 9, 2014. Retrieved March 2, 2015.
 Wong, Alistair August 5, 2018. The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild Has Been Added To The Series Official Timeline. Siliconera. Retrieved August 5, 2018.
 Mowatt, Todd. In the Game: Nintendos Shigeru Miyamoto. Amazon.com. Retrieved September 7, 2015.
 Eiji Aonuma ed.. Hyrule Historia. Dark Horse Books.
 ZELDA: The Second Quest Begins 1988, pp. 2728
 BS Zelda Info. 2010. Retrieved June 8, 2010.
 BS Zelda Info. 2010. Retrieved June 8, 2010.
 The Legend of Zelda. NinDB. Archived from the original on June 19, 2010. Retrieved February 20, 2008.
 BS Zelda Info. 2010. Retrieved June 8, 2010.
 The Best Video Games in the History of Humanity. filibustercartoons.com. 2006. Retrieved November 16, 2009.
 NP Top 200. Nintendo Power. 200. February 2006. p. 66.
 Gaiden and Ura Zelda Split. IGN. August 20, 1999. Retrieved April 10, 2007.
 The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time instruction booklet. Nintendo. 1998. pp. 1112. UNUSNZLEUSA.
 Zeldas Future is Golden. IGN. August 26, 1998. Retrieved September 24, 2007.
 Zelda Bonus Disc Coming to US. IGN. December 4, 2002. Retrieved January 22, 2006.
 The Legend of Zelda Collectors Edition. IGN. Retrieved March 19, 2007.
 Hatfield, Daemon February 23, 2007. VC Getting Arguably Greatest Game Ever. IGN. Retrieved September 24, 2007.
 Ronaghan, Neal July 2, 2015. This Week in the Nintendo Downloads. IGN. Ziff Davis. Archived from the original on July 3, 2015. Retrieved July 19, 2015.
 Mirabella III, Fran October 25, 2000. Legend of Zelda: Majoras Mask. IGN. Retrieved December 3, 2005.
 Zelda Sequel Invades Spaceworld. IGN. June 16, 1999. Retrieved January 10, 2006.
 Pelland, Scott ed. 2001. The Legend of Zelda: Oracle of SeasonsThe Legend of Zelda: Oracle of Ages Players Guide. Redmond, Washington: Nintendo of America, Inc. p. 124. ISBN 1930206100.
 Pelland, Scott ed. 2001. The Legend of Zelda: Oracle of SeasonsThe Legend of Zelda: Oracle of Ages Players Guide. Redmond, Washington: Nintendo of America, Inc. p. 120. ISBN 1930206100.
 Miyamoto Speaks on Zelda GBC. IGN. August 23, 1999. Retrieved March 30, 2007.
 The Legend of Zelda: The Third Oracle profile. IGN. Retrieved March 30, 2007.
 The Legend of Zelda: Oracle of Seasons Interview. Nintendo. 2001. Archived from the original on September 30, 2007. Retrieved March 30, 2007.
 Brad Shoemaker 2004. The Legend of Zelda: Oracle of Ages for Game Boy Color Review. GameSpot. Retrieved September 25, 2006.
 The Ultimate Gamecube FAQ. IGN. July 10, 2001. Retrieved January 21, 2006.
 Zelda on Gamecube. IGN. August 23, 2000. Retrieved January 21, 2006.
 Dingo, Star August 24, 2001. GameCube  First Look  The Legend of Zelda. GamePro. Archived from the original on January 4, 2006. Retrieved January 21, 2006.
 Miyamoto and Aonuma on Zelda. IGN. December 4, 2002. Retrieved January 21, 2006.
 Torres, Ricardo November 14, 2003. The Legend of Zelda Collectors Edition Bundle Impressions. GameSpot. Retrieved March 19, 2007.
 IGN Staff November 4, 2003. Zelda Bundle at 99. IGN. Retrieved June 26, 2006.
 Calvert, Justin January 5, 2004. New Zelda promotion for UK. GameSpot. Retrieved March 19, 2007.
 Continue the Wind Waker adventure in Links first DS game. Nintendo. Archived from the original on January 16, 2007.
 The Legend of Zelda Titles. PediaPress.
 Casamassina, Matt July 15, 2008. E3 2008: Miyamoto Says New Zelda for Wii Progressing. IGN Wii. IGN Entertainment, Inc. Retrieved July 16, 2008.
 Kohler, Chris November 2, 2009. Wii Zelda Uses MotionPlus for Swordplay, Targeting. Wired. Retrieved December 13, 2010.
 Iwata Asks : The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time 3D : One Year Steeped in The Legend of Zelda. Nintendo. p. 6. Retrieved June 29, 2011. Miyamoto: ... and The Legend of Zelda: Four Swords, scheduled for free download as the Nintendo DSiWare software starting in September.
 Limited Edition The Legend of Zelda 25th Anniversary 3DS. Archived from the original on January 9, 2012. Retrieved March 2, 2015.
 Aonuma, Eiji November 4, 2011. Interview with Eiji Aonuma and Koji Kondo. MyGames Interview in Portuguese. Interviewed by Daniel Silvestre. Archived from the original on November 6, 2011. Retrieved March 2, 2015.
 Brian Ashcraft April 17, 2013. The Next 3DS Zelda Is Set In The World Of Link To The Past. Kotaku. Retrieved April 17, 2013.
 Otero, Jose June 16, 2015. E3 2015: The Legend of Zelda: Triforce Heroes Revealed for 3DS. IGN. Ziff Davis. Archived from the original on June 16, 2015. Retrieved June 16, 2015.
 McWhertor, Michael November 12, 2015. The Legend of Zelda: Twilight Princess HD coming to Wii U in 2016. Polygon. Vox Media. Archived from the original on November 12, 2015. Retrieved November 12, 2015.
 Phil Kollar September 11, 2011. Aonuma Drops Hints On Zelda Wii U And Next Zelda For 3DS. Game Informer. Retrieved October 16, 2011.
 Richard George. New HD Zelda Revealed for Wii U. IGN. Retrieved January 23, 2013.
 Tassi, Paul March 27, 2015. Nintendo Announces The Wii Us Legend of Zelda Wont Be Seen In 2015. Forbes. Retrieved March 28, 2015.
 Vogel, Mitch April 27, 2016. The Legend of Zelda Wii U Has Been Pushed Back to 2017, Will Release on NX As Well. Nintendo Life. Gamer Network. Retrieved April 27, 2016.
 The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild  Official Game Trailer  Nintendo E3 2016. Los Angeles, California: Nintendo. June 14, 2016. Retrieved June 15, 2016.
 The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild. www.nintendo.com. Retrieved March 6, 2017.
 The 6 Worst Games Ever Farted Out by Beloved Franchises. Cracked.com.
 Norris, Jon. The Legend of Zelda Pinball Machine. Norrispinball.com. June 17, 2014.
 Miyamoto Speaks on Zelda GBC. IGN. August 23, 1999. Retrieved January 2, 2008.
 The Legend of Zelda: The Third Oracle profile. IGN. Retrieved January 2, 2008.
 Okamoto on Zelda. IGN. November 16, 1999. Retrieved January 2, 2008.
 Official US Names for TriForce series. IGN. May 13, 2000. Retrieved January 2, 2008.
 The Legend of Zelda: Oracle of Seasons Interview. Nintendo. 2001. Archived from the original on March 11, 2005. Retrieved March 30, 2007.
 Zeldas TriForce Down To Two. IGN. July 24, 2000. Retrieved January 2, 2008.
 PopFiction Episode 9: The Invisible Man Flash video. GameTrailers. July 29, 2011. Retrieved August 2, 2011.
 Nintendo Has Crushed Your Dreams of a Zelda 25th Anniversary Compilation. Kotaku. June 17, 2011.
 Makuch, Eddie March 7, 2016. Legend of Zelda Picross Revealed As My Nintendo Bonus  Report. GameSpot. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on April 4, 2016. Retrieved April 4, 2016.
 My Nintendo Picross: The Legend of Zelda: Twilight Princess. My Nintendo. 2016. Archived from the original on April 16, 2016. Retrieved April 16, 2016.
 So Maybe Well Get Link In SoulCalibur 2 HD Online After All.
 Plunkett, Luke August 26, 2014. Zelda, Animal Crossing Coming to Mario Kart 8. Kotaku. Retrieved August 26, 2014.
 Otero, Jose March 26, 2014. Sonic Lost Worlds Zelda Crossover. IGN. Retrieved March 26, 2013.
 The Legend of Zelda Reviews. GameRankings. Retrieved January 4, 2014.
 Classic NES Series: The Legend of Zelda Reviews. GameRankings. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
 Classic NES Series: The Legend of Zelda Reviews. Metacritic. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
 Zelda II: The Adventure of Link Reviews. GameRankings. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
 Classic NES Series: Zelda II: The Adventure of Link Reviews. GameRankings. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
 Classic NES Series: Zelda II: The Adventure of Link Reviews. Metacritic. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
 The Legend of Zelda: A Link to the Past Reviews. GameRankings. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
 The Legend of Zelda: A Link to the Past  Four Swords Reviews. GameRankings. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
 The Legend of Zelda: A Link to the Past  Four Swords Reviews. Metacritic. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
 The Legend of Zelda: Links Awakening Reviews. GameRankings. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
 The Legend of Zelda: Links Awakening DX Reviews. GameRankings. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
 The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time Reviews. GameRankings. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
 The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time  Master Quest Reviews. GameRankings. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
 The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time 3D Reviews. GameRankings. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
 The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time Reviews. Metacritic. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
 The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time  Master Quest Reviews. Metacritic. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
 The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time 3D Reviews. Metacritic. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
 The Legend of Zelda: Majoras Mask Reviews. GameRankings. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
 The Legend of Zelda: Majoras Mask 3D Reviews. GameRankings. Retrieved March 12, 2015.
 The Legend of Zelda: Majoras Mask Reviews. Metacritic. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
 The Legend of Zelda: Majoras Mask 3D Reviews. Metacritic. Retrieved March 12, 2015.
 The Legend of Zelda: Oracle of Seasons Reviews. GameRankings. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
 The Legend of Zelda: Oracle of Ages Reviews. GameRankings. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
 The Legend of Zelda: Four Swords Anniversary Edition Reviews. GameRankings. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
 The Legend of Zelda: Four Swords Anniversary Edition Reviews. Metacritic. Retrieved January 2, 2014.
 The Legend of Zelda: The Wind Waker Reviews. GameRankings. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
 The Legend of Zelda: The Wind Waker HD Reviews. GameRankings. Retrieved December 5, 2013.
 The Legend of Zelda: The Wind Waker Reviews. Metacritic. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
 The Legend of Zelda: The Wind Waker HD Reviews. Metacritic. Retrieved October 5, 2013.
 The Legend of Zelda: Four Swords Adventures Reviews. GameRankings. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
 The Legend of Zelda: Four Swords Adventures Reviews. Metacritic. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
 The Legend of Zelda: The Minish Cap Reviews. GameRankings. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
 The Legend of Zelda: The Minish Cap Reviews. Metacritic. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
 The Legend of Zelda: Twilight Princess Reviews. GameRankings. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
 The Legend of Zelda: Twilight Princess Reviews. GameRankings. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
 The Legend of Zelda: Twilight Princess HD Reviews. GameRankings. CBS Interactive. Retrieved April 6, 2016.
 The Legend of Zelda: Twilight Princess Reviews. Metacritic. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
 The Legend of Zelda: Twilight Princess Reviews. Metacritic. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
 The Legend of Zelda: Twilight Princess HD for Wii U Reviews. Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Retrieved April 29, 2016.
 The Legend of Zelda: Phantom Hourglass Reviews. GameRankings. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
 The Legend of Zelda: Phantom Hourglass Reviews. Metacritic. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
 The Legend of Zelda: Spirit Tracks Reviews. GameRankings. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
 The Legend of Zelda: Spirit Tracks Reviews. Metacritic. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
 The Legend of Zelda: Skyward Sword Reviews. GameRankings. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
 The Legend of Zelda: Skyward Sword Reviews. Metacritic. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
 The Legend of Zelda: A Link Between Worlds Reviews. GameRankings. Retrieved January 4, 2014.
 The Legend of Zelda: A Link Between Worlds Reviews. Metacritic. Retrieved October 26, 2013.
 The Legend of Zelda: Tri Force Heroes Reviews. GameRankings. CBS Interactive. Retrieved December 28, 2015.
 The Legend of Zelda: Tri Force Heroes Reviews. Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Retrieved December 28, 2015.
 The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild Reviews. GameRankings. CBS Interactive. Retrieved March 3, 2017.
 The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild Reviews. GameRankings. CBS Interactive. Retrieved March 3, 2017.
 The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild Reviews. Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Retrieved March 3, 2017.
 The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild Reviews. Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Retrieved March 3, 2017.
 Breath of the Wild now the second highestselling Zelda game. Nintendo Everything. Nintendo Everything. 31 January 2018. Retrieved 1 August 2018.
 Nintendo Co., Ltd.; Fiscal Year Ended March 31, 2007; Supplementary Information about Earnings Release PDF. Nintendo. April 27, 2007. p. 6. Archived from the original pdf on September 27, 2007. Retrieved July 5, 2011.
 The Legend of Zelda: Twilight Princess HD  Wii U. Nintendo Co., Ltd. Retrieved 1 August 2018. In Japanese.
 14 Titles Across Wii U and 3DS Were Million Sellers in the Last Year. Nintendo Life. 20160427. Retrieved 20180801.
 Top Selling Title Sales Unit Switch. Nintendo. Nintendo Co., Ltd. Retrieved 1 August 2018.
 Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time n64: 1998: Reviews. Metacritic. November 25, 1998. Retrieved May 5, 2007.
 Zelda Scores Big. IGN. December 11, 2002. Retrieved January 24, 2006.
 Guinness World Records. Guinness World Records Gamers Edition  Records  Nintendo. Archived from the original on April 5, 2008.
 Zelda The Wind Waker. CVG. Archived from the original on November 2, 2012. Retrieved October 2, 2008.
 Legend of Zelda: Twilight Princess. CVG. Archived from the original on May 28, 2013. Retrieved October 2, 2008.
 NP Top 200. Nintendo Power. 200. pp. 5866.
 Game Rankings  Rankings. Archived from the original on May 29, 2007. Retrieved May 18, 2008.
 IGN Best of 2007: Best Nintendo DS Game. IGN. Archived from the original on April 25, 2009. Retrieved October 2, 2008.
 GameSpys Game of the Year 2007: DS Top 10. GameSpy. Archived from the original on January 29, 2009. Retrieved January 1, 2008.
 Video Game Awards: Mr. Miyamoto Accepts The Legend Of Zeldas Hall Of Fame Award. Spike TV. Retrieved November 15, 2011.
 Zach Whalen November 1, 2004. Play Along  An Approach to Videogame Music. Game Studies. Retrieved March 29, 2008.
 Sharon R. King February 15, 1999. Compressed Data; Can You Play Feelings On the Ocarina?. 1UP.com. Retrieved March 28, 2008.
 Top 100 games of all time. Gamers.com. GX Media. Archived from the original on June 19, 2004.
 Fran Mirabella III October 25, 2000. Legend of Zelda: Majoras Mask. IGN. Retrieved March 29, 2008.
 Summer 2006: Best. Series. Ever. GameFAQs. Retrieved September 23, 2007.
 Nintendo of America July 2, 2007. Like Sands Through the Hourglass, Zeldas Debut on Nintendo DS Approaches Press release. Redmond, WA: PR Newswire. Retrieved March 2, 2015.
 Top Selling Old Nintendo Games. Old Nintendo Games. Archived from the original on July 3, 2010. Retrieved October 6, 2010.
 Next Generation. United States: Imagine Media. September 1996. p. 48.
 Kennedy, Colin, The Legend of Zelda: The Wind Waker Review, Empire.
 Houser, Dan November 9, 2012. Americana at Its Most Felonious: Q. and A.: Rockstars Dan Houser on Grand Theft Auto V. The New York Times Interview. Interviewed by Chris Suellentrop. Archived from the original on November 10, 2012. Retrieved July 30, 2015.
 Staff, I. G. N. September 10, 2001. Rockstars Sam Houser Mouths Off.
 Jonti Davies March 2007. Okami creator disappointed by Twilight Princess. joystiq.com.
 Brandon, Alexander. Interactive Composition Column 1.2. IASIG. Retrieved October 31, 2012.
 Atari to Zelda: Japans Videogames in Global Contexts, page 203
 Barton, Matt 2008. Dungeons  Desktops: The History of Computer RolePlaying Games. A K Peters, Ltd. pp. 181182, 212. ISBN 1568814119. Retrieved September 8, 2010.
 Dark Souls grand vision. Edge. Archived from the original on February 4, 2012. Retrieved July 13, 2016.
 Mielke, James. Dark Souls Creator Miyazaki on Zelda, Sequels and Starting Out. Rolling Stone. Retrieved October 6, 2016.
 Tim Rogers October 25, 2005. Shadow of the Colossus. Insert Credit.
 Hugh Langley. Peter Molyneuxs top five games of all time. TechRadar. Retrieved November 1, 2013.
 Mahardy, Mike February 19, 2016. The Legacy of Zelda.
 Totilo, Stephen. Yes, The New Assassins Creed Is Like That Lovely Zelda Game.
 Episode 478  The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt Interview with CD Projekt Red 48:45
 Final Fantasy XV inspired by Zelda: Ocarina of Time.
 Max, Josh. Dark Horse Comics Localizing Hyrule Historia. Nintendo World Report.
 McMillan, Graeme. Amazon suffers Hyrule Historia hysteria. Digital Trends.
 McWhertor, Michael August 22, 2016. Dark Horse publishing new The Legend of Zelda art book in 2017. Polygon. Vox Media. Retrieved August 22, 2016.
 Casey. The Legend of Zeldas Hyrule Encyclopedia Revealed For The Series 30th Anniversary. Siliconera. Retrieved December 18, 2016.
 The Legend of Zelda: Art and Artifacts Art Book Is Getting A Limited Edition. Siliconera. Retrieved January 10, 2017.
 Interview with WDR Radio Orchestra Manager Winfried Fechner Part 1. Square Enix Music Online. March 2010. Archived from the original on June 27, 2013. Retrieved March 2, 2015.
 Symphonic Legends Program Announcement. Square Enix Music Online. September 2010. Archived from the original on July 27, 2011. Retrieved September 14, 2010.
 More dates revealed for Legend of Zelda symphony tour. USA Today. January 5, 2012.
 Zelda Symphony. zeldasymphony.com.
 Dennison, Kara. Legend of Zelda 30th Anniversary Concert Coming to DVD and CD. Crunchyroll. Retrieved December 16, 2016.
 Jim Vejvoda August 4, 2013. Footage From the Unproduced Legend of Zelda CGAnimated Movie. IGN. Retrieved August 5, 2013.
 You Might Need Your 3DS If Theres Ever A Legend of Zelda Movie. Kotaku. Retrieved November 1, 2013.
 Nintendo wants to change movies with an interactive Zelda film. GamesIndustry. Retrieved November 1, 2013.
 Whitehead, Thomas August 3, 2014. The Legend of Zelda Monopoly Dated for 15th September in US. Nintendo Life. Retrieved August 4, 2014.
 The Legend of Zelda Clue Board Game Is Now Available for PreOrder. Dual Shockers. Retrieved April 28, 2017.
 An Official Legend of Zelda Uno Set Is Coming To North America This Week. Nintendo Life. Retrieved February 12, 2018.
Works cited

ZELDA: The Second Quest Begins. Nintendo Power. 1. JulyAugust 1988. pp. 2636.
External links
Wikimedia Commons has media related to The Legend of Zelda.
Official website
vte
The Legend of Zelda series
vte
Nintendo franchises
Triforce.svgThe Legend of Zelda portalNintendo.svgNintendo portalWPVG icon 2016.svgVideo games portalFlag of Japan.svgJapan portal
Categories: Actionadventure gamesFiction about magicActionadventure video games by seriesNintendo franchisesVideo games produced by Shigeru MiyamotoThe Legend of ZeldaVideo game franchisesVideo game franchises introduced in 1986

This is a featured article. Click here for more information. Page moveprotected
The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time
A sword and shieldthe latter bearing both the three triangles of the Triforce and the birdlike Hyrule crestare positioned behind the games title.
North American box art
DevelopersNintendo EAD
PublishersNintendo
Directors
Eiji Aonuma
Yoshiaki Koizumi
Shigeru Miyamoto1
Toshio Iwawaki
Toru Osawa
Yoichi Yamada
ProducersShigeru Miyamoto
ProgrammersKenzo Hayakawa
Artists
Yoshiaki Koizumi
Yusuke Nakano
Writers
Shigeru Miyamoto
Toru Osawa
Yoshiaki Koizumi
ComposersKoji Kondo
SeriesThe Legend of Zelda
Platforms
Nintendo 64
GameCube
iQue Player
Release
November 21, 1998show
GenresActionadventure
ModesSingleplayer
The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Timea is an actionadventure game developed and published by Nintendo for the Nintendo 64. It was released in Japan and North America in November 1998, and in Europe and Australia the following month. Ocarina of Time is the fifth game in the Legend of Zelda series, and the first with 3D graphics. Originally developed for the 64DD peripheral, it was instead released on a 256megabit 32megabyte cartridge, the largestcapacity cartridge Nintendo produced at that time.

The player controls Link in the fantasy land of Hyrule on a quest to stop Ganondorf, king of the Gerudo tribe, from obtaining the Triforce, a sacred wishgranting relic. He travels through time and navigates dungeons to awaken the Seven Sages, who can seal Ganondorf forever. Ocarina of Time introduced features such as a targetlock system and contextsensitive buttons that have since become common in 3D adventure games. Music plays an important role: to progress, the player must learn to play several songs on an ocarina, and the game was responsible for increased interest in the instrument.

In Japan, more than 820,000 copies were sold in 1998, making it the years tenthbestselling game. During its lifetime, over a million copies were sold in Japan, with over seven million sold worldwide. The game won numerous awards and accolades and is considered by many to be one of the greatest video games of all time, with several publications having ranked it the best video game of all time. It is also the highestrated game on review aggregator site Metacritic and the second highestrated on GameRankings.

Ocarina of Time was followed by a direct sequel, The Legend of Zelda: Majoras Mask, in 2000. It was ported to the GameCube alongside Ocarina of Time Master Quest, an alternative version of the game with new puzzles, and was included in The Legend of Zelda: Collectors Edition in 2003. It was ported to the iQue Player in 2003,not verified in body and released on the Virtual Console service for the Wii in 2007 and Wii U in 2015. The rereleases were well received, though some critics felt the game had aged badly. A remake for the Nintendo 3DS, Ocarina of Time 3D, was released in 2011 with updated graphics and autostereoscopic 3D effects; it includes Master Quests rearranged dungeons, absent from the Wii, Wii U, and iQue versions.


Contents
1Gameplay
2Plot
3Development
3.1Rereleases
3.1.1Master Quest
3.1.2Nintendo 3DS version
3.2Music
4Reception
4.1Legacy
5Notes
6References
7External links
Gameplay
The child version of the games protagonist, Link, stands in Hyrule field wearing his distinctive green tunic and pointed cap. In each corner of the screen are icons that display information to the player. In the upper lefthand corner there are hearts which represent Links health, in the lower lefthand corner is a counter which displays the quantity of Rupees the ingame currency possessed by the player. There is a minimap in the lower righthand corner, and five icons in the upper righthand corner, one green, one red, and three yellow, which represent the actions available to the player on the corresponding buttons of the N64 controller.
The onscreen display shows actions mapped to contextsensitive buttons. Here, the B green button controls Links sword attack, the A blue button sheaths Links sword, and the C yellow buttons control setspecific items.
The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time is a fantasy actionadventure game with roleplaying and puzzle elements set in a large, expansive environment.2 The player controls series protagonist Link from a thirdperson perspective in a threedimensional world. Link primarily fights with a sword and shield, but can also use other weapons such as projectiles, bombs, and magic spells.3:2225 The control scheme introduced techniques such as contextsensitive actions and a targeting system called Ztargeting, 4b which allows the player to have Link focus and latch onto enemies or other objects.3:1112c When using this technique, the camera follows the target and Link constantly faces it. Projectile attacks are automatically directed at the target and do not require manual aiming. Contextsensitive actions allow multiple tasks to be assigned to one button, simplifying the control scheme. The onscreen display shows what will happen when the button is pushed and changes depending on what the character is doing. For example, the same button that causes Link to push a box if he is standing next to it will have him climb on the box if the analog stick is pushed toward it.4 Much of the game is spent in battle, but some parts require the use of stealth. Exploration is another important aspect of gameplay; the player may notice inaccessible areas and return later to find them explorable after obtaining a new item, such as the bomb, to blast through walls, or the hookshot, to reach distant places.

The adult version of Link, armed with a sword and shield and wearing a green tunic, is fighting a bipedal wolf in front of the Forest Temple. Links fairy companion, Navi, has turned yellow and hovers above the creature which is now surrounded by yellow crosshairlike arrows.
When the player uses Ztargeting, the view shifts to a letterbox format and arrows indicate the targeted enemy. The player can then circle strafe around the enemy to keep their sight on them.
Link collects items and weapons throughout the game, whose abilities allow him to access, navigate and complete dungeons to advance the story. Each dungeon is a dense, selfcontained area in which Link solves puzzles and defeats enemies, and ends in a battle with the dungeons boss, a powerful unique enemy. Each dungeon and its boss share a major item and common theme; for example Link must use the Fairy Bow to complete the Forest Temple and defeat its boss, Phantom Ganon, both of which involve trickery and misdirection. Defeat of a dungeons boss grants Link a special item and advances the main quest.

Ocarina of Time has several optional sidequests that the player can choose to complete or ignore. Completing the sidequests usually results in rewards, normally in the form of weapons or abilities. In one sidequest, Link trades items he cannot use himself among nonplayer characters. This trading sequence features ten items that must be delivered within their individual time limits, and ends with Link receiving an item he can use, the twohanded Biggoron Sword, the strongest sword in the game. In another sidequest, Link can acquire a horse named Epona. This allows him to travel faster and jump over fences, but attacking while riding is restricted to arrows.3:38

Link can travel between two points in time. Part way through the main quest, Link claims the Master Sword in the Temple of Time; when Link takes the sword, he is sealed for seven years, until he becomes an adult, and therefore strong enough to wield the Master Sword. Young Link and adult Link have different abilities, and are restricted to certain items and weapons. For example, only adult Link can use the Fairy Bow and only young Link can fit through certain small passages. After completing the Forest Temple, Link can travel freely between the two time periods by replacing or taking the sword. This can grant Link access to new areas: for example, the player can plant magic plants throughout the world, and return seven years later to find the plant fullgrown and able to transport Link to secret places.

Link is given the Fairy Ocarina near the beginning of the game, which is later replaced by the Ocarina of Time, given to him by Princess Zelda. Throughout the game, Link learns twelve melodies that allow him to solve various puzzles and teleport to previously visited locations in the game.3:30 The melodies and notes are played using buttons on the Nintendo 64 controller.

Plot
See also: The Legend of Zelda  Fictional chronology
Ocarina of Time is set in the fictional kingdom of Hyrule, the setting of most The Legend of Zelda games, and takes place after Four Swords before A Link to the Past. Hyrule Field serves as the central hub connected to several outlying areas with diverse topography and the races of Hyrule.3:78

The fairy Navi awakens Link from a nightmare in which he witnesses a man in black armor pursuing a young girl on horseback. Navi brings Link to the Great Deku Tree, who is cursed and near death. The Deku Tree tells Link a wicked man of the desert cursed him and seeks to conquer the world, and that Link must stop him. Before dying, the Great Deku Tree gives Link the Spiritual Stone of the Forest and sends him to Hyrule Castle to speak with Hyrules princess.3:6

At the Hyrule Castle garden, Link meets Princess Zelda, who believes Ganondorf, the Gerudo king, is seeking the Triforce, a holy relic that gives its holder godlike power. Zelda asks Link to obtain the three Spiritual Stones so he can enter the Sacred Realm and claim the Triforce before Ganondorf reaches it.7 Link collects the other two stones: the first from Darunia, leader of the Gorons, and the second from Ruto, princess of the Zoras. Link returns to Hyrule Castle, where he sees Ganondorf chase Zelda and her caretaker Impa on horseback, like in his nightmare, and unsuccessfully attempts to stop him.8 Inside the Temple of Time, he uses the Ocarina of Time, a gift from Zelda, and the Spiritual Stones to open the door to the Sacred Realm. There he finds the Master Sword, but as he pulls it from its pedestal, Ganondorf, having snuck into the Temple after Link, appears and claims the Triforce.

Seven years later, an older Link awakens in the Sacred Realm and is met by Rauru, one of the seven sages who protects the entrance to the Sacred Realm. Rauru explains that Links spirit was sealed for seven years until he was old enough to wield the Master Sword and defeat Ganondorf, who has now taken over Hyrule.9 The seven sages can imprison Ganondorf in the Sacred Realm, but five are unaware of their identities as sages. Link is returned to the Temple of Time, where meets the mysterious Sheik, who guides him to free five temples from Ganondorfs control and allow each temples sage to awaken.10 Link befriended all five sages as a child: his childhood friend Saria, the Sage of the Forest Temple; Darunia, the Sage of the Fire Temple; Ruto, the Sage of the Water Temple; Impa, the Sage of the Shadow Temple; and Nabooru, leader of the Gerudos in Ganondorfs absence, the Sage of the Spirit Temple. After the five sages awaken, Sheik reveals herself to be Zelda in disguise, and the seventh sage. She tells Link that Ganondorfs heart was unbalanced, causing the Triforce to split into three pieces. Ganondorf acquired only the Triforce of Power, while Zelda received the Triforce of Wisdom and Link the Triforce of Courage.11

Ganondorf appears and kidnaps Zelda, imprisoning her in his castle. The other six sages help Link infiltrate the stronghold; Link frees Zelda after defeating Ganondorf, who destroys the castle in an attempt to kill Link and Zelda. After they escape the collapsing castle, Ganondorf emerges from the rubble and transforms into a boarlike monster named Ganon using the Triforce of Power. Ganon knocks the Master Sword from Links hand; with Zeldas aid, Link retrieves the Master Sword and defeats Ganon. The seven sages seal Ganondorf in the Dark Realm; still holding the Triforce of Power, he vows to take revenge on their descendants.12 Zelda uses the Ocarina of Time to send Link back to his childhood. Navi departs and young Link meets Zelda in the castle garden once more, where he retains knowledge of Hyrules fate, starting with Hyrules decline.13

Development

The Nintendo 64 with 64DD attached.
First shown as a technical and thematic demonstration video at Nintendos Shoshinkai trade show in December 1995,414 Ocarina of Time was developed concurrently with Super Mario 64 by Nintendos Entertainment Analysis  Development EAD division.15

Nintendo planned to release Super Mario 64 as a launch game for the Nintendo 64 N64 and later release Ocarina of Time for the 64DD, a disk drive peripheral for the system which was still in development.16 Nintendo eventually migrated the development of Ocarina of Time from disk to cartridge media due to the high data performance requirements imposed by continuously reading 500 motioncaptured character animations throughout gameplay.17 They planned to follow its release with a 64DD expansion disk.18

The 32megabyte game was the largest game Nintendo had created.19 Early in development, the team had concerns about the data storage constraints of the N64 cartridge; in the worstcase scenario, Ocarina of Time would follow a similar structure to Super Mario 64, with Link restricted to Ganondorfs castle as a central hub, using a portal system similar to the paintings that Mario uses to traverse the realm.20 An idea that arose from this stage of development, a battle with a doppelganger of Ganondorf that rides through paintings, was used as the boss of the Forest Temple dungeon.20

While Shigeru Miyamoto had been the principal director of Super Mario 64, he was now in charge of several directors as a producer and supervisor of Ocarina of Time.2122 During its development, individual parts of Ocarina of Time were handled by multiple directorsa new strategy for Nintendo EAD. Four or five initial teams grew in number over time, each working on different basic experiments, including scenario and planning, Links actions, transforming classic 2D items into improved 3D form, camera experiments, motion capture, sound, special effects, and the flow of time.23

Although the development team was new to 3D games, assistant director Makoto Miyanaga recalled a passion for creating something new and unprecedented.24 Miyamoto intended the game, a medieval tale of sword and sorcery, to be in the chanbara genre of Japanese sword fighting.25 The development involved more than 120 people, including stunt performers used to capture the effects of sword fighting and Links movement.26 Miyamoto initially intended Ocarina of Time to be played in a firstperson perspective27 to enable players to take in the vast terrain of Hyrule Field better and let the team focus more on developing enemies and environments. The concept was abandoned once the idea a child Link was introduced, and Miyamoto believed it necessary for Link to be visible on screen.28

Some of Miyamotos ideas were instead used in Super Mario 64, since it was to be released first.15 Other ideas were not used due to time constraints.21 Ocarina of Time originally ran on the same engine as Super Mario 64, but was so heavily modified that Miyamoto considers the final products different engines.29 One major difference between the two is camera control; the player has a lot of control over the camera in Super Mario 64, but the camera in Ocarina of Time is largely controlled by the game AI. Miyamoto said the camera controls for Ocarina of Time are intended to reflect a focus on the games world, whereas those of Super Mario 64 are centered on the character of Mario.21

We opted not to use that limited time and energy on prerendered images for use in cinema scenes, but rather on tests on other interactive elements and polishing up the game ... Actually, I changed the scenario just a few months before completion, and although the staff was rather unhappy about taking apart something they had already created, we were able to make the fixes in a short amount of time, so that it did not cause any problems timewise. It may sound like an excuse, but it is not because the N64 doesnt have access to a CDROM that we incorporated realtime movie processing. Quite the contrary, to the greatest extent possible we were able to make use of truly cinematic methods with our camera work without relying on the kind of data typically used to make cinema scenes.
Shigeru Miyamoto23
Miyamoto wanted to make a game that was cinematic, yet distinguished from films.21 Takumi Kawagoe, who creates cutscenes for Nintendo, said that his priority was to have the player feel in control of the action.30 To promote this instantaneous continuity of cinematic gameplay, the cutscenes in Ocarina of Time are completely generated with realtime computing on the Nintendo 64 and do not use prerendered fullmotion video.21 Miyamotos vision required this realtime architecture for the total of more than 90 minutes of cutscenes, regardless of whether the console had a vast medium like CDROM on which to store prerendered versions.23 Toru Osawa created the scenario for the game, based on a story idea by Miyamoto and Yoshiaki Koizumi.3132333435 He was supported by A Link to the Past and Links Awakening script writer Kensuke Tanabe.3536 Miyamoto said the realtime rendering engine allowed his small team of 3 to 7 cinematic developers to rapidly adjust the storyline and to focus on developing additional gameplay elements even up to the final few months of development, instead of waiting on a repeated prerendering process.23 The dungeons were designed by Eiji Aonuma.37

Throughout the late 1990s, the Nintendo 64 was said to be critically lacking in firstparty hit releases. Next Generation magazine stated that Nintendo absolutely cant afford another holiday season without a real marquee title and that Zelda was one of the most anticipated games of the decade, upon which the Nintendo 64s fate depended.38 In March 1998, Ocarina of Time was the most anticipated Nintendo 64 game in Japan.39 Chairman Howard Lincoln insisted at E3 1998 that Zelda would be shipped on time and would become the companys reinvigorating blockbuster akin to a hit Hollywood movie.38

Customers in North America who preordered the game received a limited edition box with a golden plastic card affixed, reading Collectors Edition. This edition contained a goldcolored cartridge,40 a tradition for the Zelda series that began with the original game for the Nintendo Entertainment System. Demand was so great that Electronics Boutique stopped preselling the game on November 3, 1998.41 Several versions of Ocarina of Time were produced, with later revisions featuring minor changes such as glitch repairs, the recoloring of Ganondorfs blood from crimson to green, and the alteration of the music heard in the Fire Temple dungeon to remove a sample of an Islamic prayer chant.4243 The sample was taken from a commercially available sound library, but the developers did not realize it contained Islamic references. Although popularly believed to have been changed due to public outcry, the chanting was in fact removed after the company discovered it violated their own policy to avoid religious material in games,43 and the altered versions of Ocarina of Time were made prior to the games original release.44

Rereleases
Nintendo ported Ocarina of Time to its next console, the GameCube, as part of The Legend of Zelda: Collectors Edition, a compilation of Zelda games.42 The port runs at a resolution of 640480, double that of the original, and supports progressive scan.4245 The compilation was included as a preorder bonus with The Legend of Zelda: The Wind Waker 2002 in Japan and North America46 and included in GameCube bundles worldwide. It was also given to those who registered certain hardware and software or subscribed to official magazines and clubs.4748

In February 2007, Ocarina of Time was released for the Wii Virtual Console service for 1000 Wii Points.49 This version is an emulation of the Nintendo 64 version; as controller vibration is unsupported, the Stone of Agony item, which employs vibrations via the Nintendo 64 Rumble Pak controller accessory, has no function.50 A fiveminute demo of the game can be unlocked in Super Smash Bros. Brawl 2008. Ocarina of Time was rereleased on the Wii U Virtual Console worldwide on July 2, 2015,51 this time including the original controller vibration.52

Master Quest
After completing Ocarina of Time, Nintendo developed a new version of the game for the thenunreleased 64DD peripheral with the working title Ura Zelda,53 commonly translated as Another Zelda.54 Described as a second version of Ocarina with rearranged dungeons,53 it contains new content, some which had been cut from Ocarina due to time and storage constraints.555657 In 1998, Ura Zelda was delayed indefinitely following problems with the development of the 64DD,56 and was canceled due to the 64DDs commercial failure.58 In August 2000, Miyamoto stated that Ura Zelda had been finished and that no online functions had ever been planned.59

Ura Zelda was ported to the GameCube in 2002 in Japan as Zeruda no Densetsu: Toki no Okarina GC Ura   GC and in 2003 in North America and Europe as The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time Master Quest.535860 According to Miyamoto, the Ura Zelda was simple to port as it used few of the 64DD features.58 Master Quest uses the same engine and plot of Ocarina of Time, but with increased difficulty and altered dungeons and puzzles.42

IGNs Peer Schneider gave Master Quest a mostly positive review, likening the concept to the second quest of the original Legend of Zelda. He felt that some redesigned areas were poorer than the original Ocarina of Time, and speculated that they may have been constructed from second choice designs created during development. He described the port graphically improved, but lazy, with a clumsy controller translation and no substantial frame rate improvement. Nonetheless, he summarized Master Quest as a sweet surprise for any Zelda fan and wrote that he would have recommended it even at full price.42 Zachary Lewis of RPG Gamer praised the revised puzzles, which require precise timing and find new uses for the Ocarina items, but wrote that players would be enthralled or frustrated by the increased difficulty.61

Nintendo 3DS version
Main article: The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time 3D

Link swims in the Water Temple while wearing the Zora Tunic, which allows him to breathe underwater.
In June 2011, Nintendo released Ocarina of Time 3D, an enhanced port for the Nintendo 3DS handheld console.62 It was developed by Nintendo EAD with Grezzo, an independent Japanese studio headed by Koichi Ishii.62 The game includes Master Quest and adds features including touchscreen and gyroscope controls,63 a Boss Challenge mode,64 instructional videos to guide stuck players,65 and modified version of the Water Temple with reduced difficulty.66

Music
Main article: The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time original soundtrack
Ocarina of Times music was written by Koji Kondo, the composer in charge of music for most of the games in The Legend of Zelda series.67 In addition to characters having musical themes, areas of Hyrule are also associated with pieces of music.68 This has been called leitmotif in reverseinstead of music announcing an entering character, it now introduces a stationary environment as the player approaches.69 In some locations, the music is a variation of an ocarina tune the player learns, related to that area.69

Beyond providing a backdrop for the setting, music plays an integral role in gameplay. The button layout of the Nintendo 64 controller resembles the holes of the ocarinas in the game,70 and players must learn to play several songs to complete the game. All songs are played using the five notes available on an ocarina, although by bending pitches via the analog stick, players can play additional tones.70 Kondo said that creating distinct themes on the limited scale was a major challenge, but feels that the end result is very natural.67 The popularity of Ocarina of Time led to an increase in ocarina sales.71

The official soundtrack of Ocarina of Time was published by Pony Canyon and released in Japan on December 18, 1998.72 It comprises one compact disc with 82 tracks.72 An American version was also released, although with fewer tracks and different packaging artwork. Many critics praised the music in Ocarina of Time, although IGN was disappointed that the traditional Zelda overworld theme was not included.70 In 2001, three years after the initial release of Ocarina of Time, GameSpot labeled it as one of the top ten video game soundtracks.68 The soundtrack, at the time, was not released in Europe or Australia. In 2011, however, a 51track limited edition soundtrack for the 3DS version was available in a free mail out through a Club Nintendo offer to owners of the 3DS edition, as an incentive to register the product. The original musical theme for the Fire Temple area was altered before release of the game, due to Nintendos policy of not including real religious references in their products, with the altered theme simply removing the chanting samples.73

Hero of Time, an orchestral recording of Ocarina of Times score performed by the Slovak National Symphony Orchestra, was released by video game label Materia Collective in 2017. A vinyl version was published by iam8bit.74 It was nominated for Best Game Music CoverRemix at the 16th Annual Game Audio Network Guild Awards.75

Reception
Reception
Aggregate scores
AggregatorScore
GameRankings9876
Metacritic9910077
Review scores
PublicationScore
AllGame55 stars78
Edge101079
EGM101080
Famitsu404081
GamePro55 stars82
Game RevolutionA
GameSpot101083
GameTrailersN64: 1010
IGN101070
Nintendo Power9.5108485
RPGamer5561
Awards
PublicationAward
CESA Award,86 Edge,87 EGM,88 Games,89 GameSpot,90 Interactive Achievement Award,91 Japan Media Arts Festival,92 MMCA,93 VSDA Award94Game of the Year
Computer and Video Games,9596 Edge,979899100 Entertainment Weekly,96 GameTrailers,96 IGN,101102 Metacritic,103 Next Generation,96 Nintendo Power,103104105 GameStats,106 GameFAQs,107 GamingBolt,108 VideoGamer,109 Game Informer,110 Slant,111 FHM,112 Joystik,113 PALGN114Greatest Game of All Time
Ocarina of Time was released to widespread critical acclaim and strong commercial success worldwide. In the United States, over 500,000 preorders were placed, more than tripling the number of preorders for any previous video game,115 and more than 1 million copies were sold there in less than a week.93 In 1998, 2.5 million copies were sold, although it was released only 39 days before the end of the year; it earned 150 million in US revenues, higher than any Hollywood film in the last six weeks of 1998.116 In Japan, 820,000 copies were sold in 1998, becoming the tenth bestselling game of that year;117 a reported 386,234 copies were sold in its first week there, surpassing the 316,000 firstweek sales of Metal Gear Solid.118 In the United Kingdom, 61,232 copies were sold during its first weekend.93 During its lifetime, Ocarina of Time saw 1.14 million copies sold in Japan,119 and 7.6 million copies worldwide.120

On its initial Nintendo 64 release, Ocarina of Time received perfect review scores from the majority of gaming publications that reviewed it,76103 including Famitsu,81 Edge,79 Electronic Gaming Monthly,80 GameSpot,83 and IGN.70 The review aggregator websites Metacritic and GameRankings respectively rank the original Nintendo 64 version as the highest and second highest reviewed game of all time, with average scores of 99100 from Metacritic and 98 from GameRankings it earned a Metacritic: MustPlay certification on the former in 2018.7776 The reviews praised multiple aspects of the game, particularly its level design, gameplay mechanics, sound, and cinematics. GameSpot reviewer Jeff Gerstmann wrote that Ocarina of Time is a game that cant be called anything other than flawless,83 and IGN called it the new benchmark for interactive entertainment that could shape the action RPG genre for years to come.70 Editors of GameTrailers called it a walking patent office due to its number of features that became industry standard.121

The graphics were praised for their depth and detail, although reviewers noted they were not always the best the console had to offer. Game Revolution noted the characters faces, the toughest graphical challenge on 3D characters, saying that the characters expressions and animation featured surprising grace.122 IGN believed that Ocarina of Time improved on the graphics of Super Mario 64, giving a larger sense of scale.70 Impressive draw distances and large boss characters were also mentioned as graphical highlights.70 Although excelling in the use of color and the visibility and detail of the environment, reviewers noted that some graphical elements of Ocarina of Time did not perform as well as BanjoKazooie,7080 a game released for the same platform earlier that year. IGN said that the frame rate and textures of Ocarina of Time were not as good as those of BanjoKazooie, particularly in the marketplace of Hyrule Castle, which was called blurry.70

Gameplay was generally praised as detailed, with many side quests to occupy players time. IGN said players would be amazed at the detail of the environment and the amount of thought that went into designing it. IGN praised the cinematics, citing great emotional impact and flawless camera work.23 EGM enjoyed that Nintendo was able to take the elements of the older, 2D Zelda games and translate it all into 3D flawlessly.80 Nintendo Power cited Ocarina of Time, along with Super Mario 64, as two games that blazed trails into the 3D era.123 The contextsensitive control system was seen as one of the strongest elements of the gameplay.70 Reviewers noted that it allowed for simpler control using fewer buttons, but that it occasionally caused the player to perform unintended actions.470 The camera control was quoted as making combat second nature,70 although the new system took time for the player to get used to.7080

The games audio was generally well received, with IGN comparing some of Koji Kondos pieces to the work of Philip Glass.70 Many atmospheric sounds and surround sound were designed to effectively immerse the player in the game world. Some reviewers complained that the audio samples used in the game sounded dated;70 others considered this a benefit, calling them retro.122 Game Revolution called the sound good for the Nintendo, but not great in the larger scheme of things and noted that the cartridge format necessitated MIDI tunes that range from fair to terrible.122

In 1998, Ocarina of Time won the Grand Prize in the Interactive Art division at the Japan Media Arts Festival.92 It also won six honors at the 2nd Annual Interactive Achievement Awards, including Game of the Year, Outstanding Achievement in Interactive Design, Outstanding Achievement in Software Engineering, Console Game of the Year, Console Adventure Game of the Year and Console RPG of the Year.91 Electronic Gaming Monthly gave it both the editors choice and readers choice awards for Game of the Year for All Systems, Nintendo 64 Game of the Year and Action RPG of the Year as well as the readers choice awards for Best Music and Best Graphics, and it was runnerup for the readers choice Best Sound Effects award.124 Edge gave it the awards for Game of the Year and Gameplay Innovation and placed it 2nd place for Graphical Achievement behind Virtua Fighter 3tb.87

Legacy
After publication, Ocarina of Time was featured on a number of compiled lists of best or most influential games. It was ranked the greatest video game of all time by numerous publications including Computer and Video Games,9596 Edge,979899100 Entertainment Weekly,96 GameTrailers,96 IGN,101102 Metacritic,103 Next Generation,96 Nintendo Power,103104105 GameFAQs,107 GameStats,106 GamingBolt,108 VideoGamer,109 Game Informer,110 Slant,111 FHM,112 Joystik,113 and PALGN.114 It also appeared on other lists of greatest games including those of Electronic Gaming Monthly125 and IGN.101102126127 The game was placed second in Official Nintendo Magazines 100 greatest Nintendo games of all time, behind only Super Mario Bros.128 Game Informer ranked it as its 11th favorite game of all time and described it as untouchable.129 In May 2011, IGN held a tournamentstyle competition celebrating the 25th anniversary of the original The Legend of Zeldas release in which fans voted Ocarina of Time the greatest Zelda game; it beat Majoras Mask in the final round.130 Rockstar Games vice president of creativity Dan Houser stated in 2012, Anyone who makes 3D games who says theyve not borrowed something from Mario or Zelda on the Nintendo 64 is lying.131 Ocarina of Time has consistently been placed at number one in Edges top 100 games lists: a staffvoted list in January 2000,97 a staff and readervoted list in July 2007,98 a list of The 100 Best Games to Play Today in March 2009,99 and a 2013 readers poll selecting the 20 best games released since the magazines launch in 1993.100 Edge concluded its 2009 list with, Ocarina of Time is here in the list not because Nintendo had the power and wisdom to make a great game, but because it had the courage to make a unique one.132

Reception for the Master Quest and Virtual Console rereleases was positive; while some considered aspects of the graphics and audio to be outdated,61133 most thought that the game has aged well. The Master Quest version holds an average score of 89.50 on GameRankings and 91100 on Metacritic.134135 IGN said in their review, Ocarina of Time has aged extremely well,42 and noted in regard to the games graphics, While the textures and models look dated, the games wonderful visual presentation stood the test of time. Game Revolution said that although the game has noticeably aged compared to brand new RPGs ... its still a terrific game, awarding 91 out of 100.136 Former GameSpot editor Jeff Gerstmann gave the Virtual Console port 8.9 out of 10, writing, Even after nine years, Ocarina of Time holds up surprisingly well, offering a lengthy and oftenamazing adventure.50

Notes
 Known in Japanese as   Zeruda no Densetsu: Toki no Okarina
 So named because it was executed by the Z button; Ztargeting is referred to as Ltargeting in the GameCube rereleases.56
 In the GameCube port of Ocarina of Time and the Wiis Virtual Console version, targeting is done with the L button instead of the Z button due to the position of the Z button on the GameCube controller and Classic Controller.
References
 E3: Through the Eyes of Miyamoto Pt. 2. IGN. 18 June 1997.
 Game Design Essentials: 20 Open World Games. Gamasutra. September 26, 2007. Retrieved July 18, 2018.
 The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time instruction booklet PDF. United States: Nintendo. 1998. UNUSNZLEUSA.
 The Essential 50 Part 40: The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time. 1UP.com. Archived from the original on July 18, 2012.
 The Legend of Zelda: Collectors Edition instruction booklet. USA: Nintendo. 2003. pp. 1617.
 The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of TimeMaster Quest instruction booklet. USA: Nintendo. 2003. pp. 1415.
 Nintendo Entertainment Analysis  Development November 23, 1998. The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time. Nintendo 64. Nintendo. Princess Zelda: You go find the other two Spiritual Stones! Lets get the Triforce before Ganondorf does, and then defeat him!
 Nintendo Entertainment Analysis  Development November 23, 1998. The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time. Nintendo 64. Nintendo. Ganondorf: Arrrrgh! I lost her! You, over there! Little kid! You must have seen the white horse gallop past just now ... Which way did it go?! Answer me!! So, you think you can protect them from me ... Youve got guts, kid. Heh heh heh ... You want a piece of me?! Very funny! I like your attitude! Pathetic little fool! Do you realize who you are dealing with?! I am Ganondorf! And soon, I will rule the world!
 Nintendo Entertainment Analysis  Development November 23, 1998. The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time. Nintendo 64. Nintendo. Rauru: The Master Sword is a sacred blade which evil ones may never touch ... Only one worthy of the title of Hero of Time can pull it from the Pedestal of Time ... However, you were too young to be the Hero of Time ... Therefore, your spirit was sealed here for seven years. ... Though you opened the Door of Time in the name of peace ... Ganondorf, the Gerudo King of Thieves, used it to enter this forbidden Sacred Realm! He obtained the Triforce from the Temple of Light, and with its power, he became the King of Evil ... His evil power radiated from the temples of Hyrule, and in seven short years, it transformed Hyrule into a world of monsters.
 Nintendo Entertainment Analysis  Development November 23, 1998. The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time. Nintendo 64. Nintendo. Sheik: You must look for the five temples and awaken the five Sages ... One Sage is waiting for the time of awakening in the Forest Temple. ... Because of the evil power in the temple, she cannot hear the awakening call from the Sacred Realm ...
 Nintendo Entertainment Analysis  Development November 23, 1998. The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time. Nintendo 64. Nintendo. Sheik: Seven years ago, Ganondorf, the King of Thieves, used the door you opened in the Temple of Time and entered the Sacred Realm. But when he laid his hands on the Triforce, the legend came true. The Triforce separated into three parts. Only the Triforce of Power remained in Ganondorfs hand.
 Nintendo Entertainment Analysis  Development November 23, 1998. The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time. Nintendo 64. Nintendo. Ganondorf: Someday... When this seal is broken.... That is when I will exterminate your descendants!! As long as the Triforce of Power is in my hand.... Zelda: Thank you, Link... Thanks to you, Ganondorf has been sealed inside the Evil Realm!
 Nintendo Entertainment Analysis  Development November 23, 1998. The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time. Nintendo 64. Nintendo.
 Legend of Zelda. Next Generation. No. 14. Imagine Media. February 1996. p. 55. Well, the fact is that the videotape sequences shown at Shoshinkai bear very little resemblance to what the final product will actually look like. Spectacular scenes of a surprisingly large Link clad in polished armor are most likely to end up in cutscenes rather than representing the actual play.
 Miyamoto Speaks. Nintendo Power. Vol. 89. October 1996. pp. 6467.
 Vestal, Andrew; ONeill, Cliff; Shoemaker, Brad. The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time. History of Zelda. GameSpot. Archived from the original on February 4, 2013.
 Iwawaki, Toshio; Aonuma, Eiji; Kawagoe, Takumi; Koizumi, Yoshiaki; Osawa, Toru. Iwata Asks : The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time 3D : What We Couldnt Do with The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time Interview. Interviewed by Satoru Iwata. Nintendo. Archived from the original on July 25, 2015. Retrieved February 4, 2015.
 Zelda Officially Goes to Cart. IGN. March 7, 1997. Archived from the original on October 25, 2014. Retrieved April 23, 2008.
 Zelda 64 News: The biggest Cartridge Game Ever. IGN. August 21, 1997. Archived from the original on March 30, 2014. Retrieved October 23, 2007.
 Walker, Matt June 15, 2011. Ocarina of Time Had Mario 64Esque Paintings Early in Development. NintendoWorldReport.com. Archived from the original on June 20, 2011. Retrieved June 21, 2011.
 Sensei Speaks. IGN. January 29, 1999. Archived from the original on August 20, 2013. Retrieved May 8, 2008.
 E3: Through the Eyes of Miyamoto Pt. 2. IGN. June 18, 1997. Archived from the original on October 22, 2013. Retrieved December 17, 2008.
 IGN Staff; Miyamoto, Shigeru March 18, 1999. GDC: Miyamoto Keynote Speech. Retrieved October 23, 2017. We opted not to use that limited time and energy on prerendered images for use in cinema scenes, but rather on tests on other interactive elements and polishing up the game ... Actually, I changed the scenario just a few months before completion, and although the staff was rather unhappy about taking apart something they had already created, we were able to make the fixes in a short amount of time, so that it did not cause any problems timewise. It may sound like an excuse, but it is not because the N64 doesnt have access to a CDROM that we incorporated realtime movie processing. Quite the contrary, to the greatest extent possible we were able to make use of truly cinematic methods with our camera work without relying on the kind of data typically used to make cinema scenes.
 Inside Zelda Part 12: The Role of the Sidekick. Nintendo Power. Vol. 203. May 2006. pp. 7678.
 Miyamoto, Shigeru. Iwata Asks: The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time 3D: Mr. Shigeru Miyamoto Interview. Interviewed by Satoru Iwata. Nintendo of America, Inc. Archived from the original on July 25, 2015. Retrieved February 4, 2015.
 The Legend of Miyamoto. Nintendo Power. Vol. 111. August 1998. pp. 5255. Archived from the original on March 19, 2005. Retrieved April 26, 2014.
 Mark Serrels July 10, 2013. Why Are You Here? Shigeru Miyamoto And The Ocarina Of Time. Kotaku Australia. Archived from the original on October 2, 2013. Retrieved October 11, 2013.
 Iwata Asks: Links Crossbow Training. Nintendo of America, Inc. May 8, 2008. Archived from the original on July 25, 2015. Retrieved May 8, 2008.
 Interview with Shigeru Miyamoto. Nintendo Power. Nintendo of America. November 19, 1998. Archived from the original on June 19, 2004. Retrieved April 26, 2014.
 Inside Zelda Part 7: An Honest Perspective on Hyrule. Nintendo Power. Vol. 198. December 2005. pp. 7072.
 Question and Answer Session with Mr. Miyamoto. Nintendo. Archived from the original on May 30, 1998. Retrieved May 30, 2010. Shigeru Miyamoto: However, the scenario and game modes are only about 50 my idea.
 Interview mit dem Meister. Club Nintendo in German. No. Ausgabe 4. Nintendo of Europe GmbH. August 1998. p. 17. Shigeru Miyamoto: Die komplette Story ist von mir.  The entire story is from me.
 Kohler, Chris December 4, 2007. Interview: Super Mario Galaxy Director On Sneaking Stories Past Miyamoto. Wired. Cond Nast Digital. Archived from the original on June 15, 2009. Retrieved June 10, 2010.
 Interview: Nintendos Unsung Star. Edge. Future plc. February 6, 2008. Archived from the original on August 20, 2012. Retrieved July 11, 2010.
 Nintendo Co., Ltd November 23, 1998. The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time. Nintendo of America, Inc. Scene: staff credits.
  101. Gpara.com. February 10, 2003. Archived from the original on September 30, 2011. Retrieved April 26, 2014.
 Iwata Asks : The Legend of Zelda: Spirit Tracks : The Previous Game Felt As Though Wed Given Our All. Nintendo. Archived from the original on July 25, 2015. Retrieved October 18, 2010. Eiji Aonuma: Our first 3D The Legend of Zelda game for the N64 turned out to be The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time. I did some direction on that one, although it was only partial: I was in charge of dungeon design.
 Nintendo 64. Next Generation. No. 44. August 1998. pp. 4041. Retrieved December 14, 2015.
 What Japan Wants. IGN. April 22, 1998. Retrieved April 1, 2018.
 Zeldas Future is Golden. IGN. August 26, 1998. Archived from the original on February 20, 2014. Retrieved September 24, 2007.
 Ye Snoozed, Ye Loozed. IGN. November 3, 1998. Archived from the original on October 25, 2014. Retrieved September 24, 2007.
 Schneider, Peer February 27, 2003. Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time  Master Quest. IGN. Archived from the original on January 29, 2015. Retrieved February 1, 2015.
 Dylan James May 30, 2012. Nintendo Officially Talks about the Infamous Ocarina of Time Fire Temple Chant. Zelda Informer. Archived from the original on February 12, 2013. Retrieved February 2, 2013.
 PopFiction Episode 9: Fire Temple Chants Flash video. GameTrailers. February 22, 2011. Archived from the original on January 21, 2013. Retrieved April 27, 2011.
 The Legend of Zelda Collectors Edition. IGN. Archived from the original on September 29, 2012. Retrieved April 23, 2008.
 Zelda Bonus Disc Coming to US. IGN. December 4, 2002. Archived from the original on October 25, 2014. Retrieved September 24, 2007.
 Limited Edition Zelda in Europe. IGN. April 15, 2003. Archived from the original on October 25, 2014. Retrieved September 24, 2007.
 Zelda Bundle at 99. IGN. November 4, 2003. Archived from the original on July 13, 2013. Retrieved September 24, 2007.
 Surette, Tim February 24, 2007. Ocarina of Time to blow on VC. GameSpot. Archived from the original on March 6, 2012.
 Gerstmann, Jeff March 5, 2007. The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time Virtual Console review. GameSpot. Archived from the original on October 15, 2007. Retrieved October 27, 2007.
 Ronaghan, Neal July 2, 2015. This Week in the Nintendo Downloads. IGN. Ziff Davis. Archived from the original on July 3, 2015. Retrieved July 3, 2015.
 Town, Jonathan July 3, 2015. The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time Wii U eShop  N64 Review. Nintendo Life. Gamer Network. Archived from the original on July 6, 2015. Retrieved July 26, 2015.
 IGN: GDC 2004: The History of Zelda. IGN. Archived from the original on February 13, 2015. Retrieved October 10, 2014.
 IGN Staff August 20, 1999. Gaiden and Ura Zelda Split. Archived from the original on February 20, 2015. Retrieved February 1, 2015.
 Nintendo Sequel Rumblings. IGN. May 11, 1999. Archived from the original on February 20, 2015. Retrieved January 20, 2015.
 Zelda DD: The Other Adventure. IGN. November 17, 1998. Archived from the original on September 9, 1999.
 Info on Ura Zelda at Unseen64. Unseen 64: Beta, Cancelled  Unseen Videogames!. Archived from the original on May 27, 2013. Retrieved October 10, 2014.
 IGN: Miyamoto and Aonuma on Zelda. IGN. Archived from the original on February 13, 2015. Retrieved October 10, 2014.
 Miyamoto, Shigeru August 28, 2000. Miyamoto Roundtable: Game designer Shigeru Miyamoto talks to the press about Gamecube, N64 and GBA. IGN Interview. Interviewed by IGN Staff. Archived from the original on August 12, 2016. Retrieved August 8, 2016.
 Fahs, Travis; Thomas, Lucas August 27, 2010. IGN Presents the History of Zelda. IGN. Ziff Davis. p. 3. Archived from the original on February 24, 2014. Retrieved December 30, 2015.
 Lewis, Zachary. Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time Master Quest  Review. RPGamer. Archived from the original on June 20, 2003. Retrieved October 2, 2008.
 Ocarina of Time 3DS Release Dates. N4G Network. Archived from the original on October 15, 2011. Retrieved October 18, 2011.
 Zelda Ocarina of Time 3DS Preview: Everything About This Masterpiece!  Best Nintendo 3DS Games. Best Nintendo 3DS Games. Archived from the original on October 28, 2014. Retrieved December 31, 2014.
 Master Quest Included In Oot3d, DS News  GamerZines: Free Digital Games Magazines. GamerZines. Archived from the original on November 2, 2014. Retrieved October 10, 2014.
 Boss Mode Coming to Ocarina of Time 3D  Nintendo 3DS News at IGN. IGN. Archived from the original on January 29, 2017. Retrieved October 10, 2014.
 Retrospective: The Legend Of Zelda: Ocarina Of Time. Edge. April 21, 2014. Archived from the original on April 23, 2014. Retrieved October 9, 2014.
 Inside Zelda Part 4: Natural Rhythms of Hyrule. Nintendo Power. Vol. 195. September 2005. pp. 5658.
 Trueman, Doug. Top Ten Video Game Soundtracks. GameSpot. p. 11. Archived from the original on January 25, 2013.
 Whalen, Zach November 2004. Play Along  An Approach to Video Game Music. the international journal of computer game research. 4 1. Archived from the original on October 3, 2006. Retrieved September 24, 2006.
 Schneider, Peer November 25, 1998. Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time review. IGN. Archived from the original on October 9, 2012. Retrieved January 29, 2006.
 King, Sharon R. February 15, 1999. Compressed Data; Can You Play Feelings On the Ocarina?. The New York Times. Archived from the original on July 7, 2009. Retrieved August 25, 2009.
  in Japanese. Pony Canyon. Archived from the original on May 8, 2008. Retrieved April 17, 2013.
 Nintendo Officially Talks about the Infamous Ocarina of Time Fire Temple Chant. Zelda Informer. Archived from the original on November 23, 2016. Retrieved November 13, 2016.
 Crecente, Brian December 8, 2016. The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time soundtrack vinyl in the works. Polygon. Vox Media. Archived from the original on December 9, 2016. Retrieved December 8, 2016.
 2018 Awards. Game Audio Network Guild. Retrieved April 14, 2018.
 The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time reviews. GameRankings. Archived from the original on March 6, 2009. Retrieved November 26, 2008.
 The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time reviews. Metacritic. Archived from the original on November 21, 2010. Retrieved December 20, 2010.
 Marriott, Scott Alan. The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time Review. AllGame. Archived from the original on November 14, 2014. Retrieved June 16, 2008.
 Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time review. Edge. Bath: Future plc. December 1998. pp. 8487.
 Huber, Brooks. Retro Review: Zelda Ocarina of Time. 1UP. Archived from the original on July 15, 2012.
 Zelda Receives Highest Ever Famitsu Score. IGN. November 13, 1998. Archived from the original on October 11, 2012. Retrieved April 13, 2008.
 Internet Archive Wayback Machine. gamepro.com. Archived from the original on July 5, 2008.
 Gerstmann, Jeff November 23, 1998. The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time review. GameSpot. Archived from the original on October 15, 2013. Retrieved January 29, 2006.
 Now Playing. Nintendo Power. Vol. 114. November 1998. p. 122.
 Nintendo Power Vol. 114, p. 122. Archived from the original on July 24, 2013. Retrieved October 10, 2014.
 3rd CESA Awards. Japan Game Awards. 1998. Retrieved February 13, 2012.
 File:Edge UK 067.pdf  Retro CDN. retrocdn.net.
 1998 Gamers Choice Awards. Electronic Gaming Monthly. No. 117. April 1999. pp. 107114 114.
 Previous Game of the Year Awards. Games. Archived from the original on February 9, 2012. Retrieved February 13, 2012.
 Overall Best Game of the Year. GameSpot. 1998. Archived from the original on May 8, 1999. Retrieved February 13, 2012.
 1999 2nd Annual Interactive Achievement Awards. Academy of Interactive Arts and Sciences. Archived from the original on October 23, 2010. Retrieved January 6, 2009.
 2nd Annual Japan Media Arts Festival. Japan Media Arts Plaza. Archived from the original on October 13, 2007. Retrieved September 20, 2007.
 Zelda Sales Go Deku Nuts!. Computer and Video Games. No. 207. Emap. February 1999. p. 8. Archived from the original on April 4, 2016.
 Home Entertainment Awards  Video Games. Entertainment Merchants Association. Archived from the original on May 2, 2012. Retrieved February 5, 2012.
 Computer and Video Games, issue 240, November 2001, pages 5965
 The Best Video Games in the History of Humanity. Filibustercartoons.com. Archived from the original on September 21, 2010. Retrieved September 12, 2010.
 Mott, Tony, ed. 2007. Edge Presents The 100 Best Videogames. Future. p. 255. Reprinting material from Edge issue 80.
 Edge Staff April 21, 2014. Retrospective: The Legend Of Zelda: Ocarina Of Time. Edge. Future. Archived from the original on April 23, 2014. Retrieved June 1, 2014.
 Edge Staff March 9, 2009. The 100 Best Games to Play Today. Edge. Future. Archived from the original on March 26, 2012. Retrieved November 21, 2009.
 McFerran, Damien October 24, 2013. Readers Of EDGE Consider Ocarina Of Time And Mario 64 To Be The Best Games Of The Last 20 Years. Nintendo Life. Gamer Network. Archived from the original on January 29, 2017. Retrieved September 1, 2016.
 Readers Picks Top 100 Games: 110. IGN. 2006. Archived from the original on November 3, 2013. Retrieved April 26, 2014.
 1. The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time. Top 100 Games of All Time. IGN. 2008. Archived from the original on January 2, 2014. Retrieved April 26, 2014.
 NP Top 200. Nintendo Power. Vol. 200. February 2006. p. 66.
 Nintendo Power, issue 231, August 2008
 Archived copy. Archived from the original on 20161102. Retrieved 20161203., Nintendo Power, 2012
 All Games By GameStats Score. GameStats. IGN. February 9, 2013.
 Spring 2009: Best. Game. Ever. GameFAQs. Archived from the original on January 2, 2016. Retrieved December 13, 2014.
 Top 100 greatest video games ever made. www.gamingbolt.com. GamingBolt. April 19, 2013. Archived from the original on October 26, 2014. Retrieved December 30, 2014.
 Top Games of All Time. VideoGamer.com. Retrieved August 15, 2011.
 GI Top Ten List, Game Informer, 1999
 100 Greatest Video Games of All Time Archived 20150712 at the Wayback Machine., Slant, 2014
 The 10 Greatest Games of All Time, FHM, 2010
 Top 100 Video Games of All Time, Joystik, 2017
 The Greatest 100 Games Ever, PALGN, 2005
 Editors, Business. Nintendo Promises More Zelda on the Way; Retail Shortages of Video Game should be Rectified Soon. Business Wire: 1. November 27, 1998. ProQuest. Web. July 23, 2013.
 Zelda Breaks All Records. IGN. January 7, 1999. Archived from the original on May 9, 2014. Retrieved September 20, 2007.
 1998TOP100 in Japanese. geimin. Archived from the original on May 7, 2009. Retrieved April 23, 2009.
 N64 saviour gathers momentum PDF. Edge. No. 67. United Kingdom: Future plc. January 1999. p. 11.
  in Japanese. . Archived from the original on April 11, 2008. Retrieved May 28, 2009.
 GDC 2004: The History of Zelda. IGN. March 25, 2004. Archived from the original on November 16, 2013. Retrieved April 29, 2008.
 Top Ten Best and Worst Games of All Time. GameTrailers. November 17, 2006. Archived from the original on August 19, 2012. Retrieved January 19, 2009.
 Baldric. Without a fairy, youre not even a real man. Game Revolution. Archived from the original on July 4, 2013. Retrieved April 9, 2008.
 Nintendo Power 250th issue!. South San Francisco, California: Future US. 2010. p. 48.
 1998 Gamers Choice Awards. Electronic Gaming Monthly. No. 117. April 1999. pp. 107114.
 EGM staff 2001. Electronic Gaming Monthlys 100 Best Games of All Time. Archived from the original on June 20, 2003. Retrieved January 2, 2008.
 IGNs Top 100 Games of All Time. IGN. 2007. Archived from the original on August 25, 2013. Retrieved April 26, 2014.
 The Top 125 Nintendo Games of All Time. IGN. September 24, 2014. Archived from the original on September 26, 2014. Retrieved September 26, 2014.
 East, Tom. 100 Best Nintendo Games  Part Six. Official Nintendo Magazine. Future plc. Archived from the original on October 30, 2014.
 Cork, Jeff November 16, 2009. Game Informers Top 100 Games of All Time Circa Issue 100. Game Informer. Archived from the original on February 13, 2016. Retrieved December 10, 2013.
 Greatest Legend of Zelda Game Tournament  IGN. IGN. Archived from the original on July 27, 2013.
 Houser, Dan November 9, 2012. Americana at Its Most Felonious: Q. and A.: Rockstars Dan Houser on Grand Theft Auto V. The New York Times Interview. Interviewed by Chris Suellentrop. Archived from the original on November 10, 2012. Retrieved July 30, 2015.
 The 100 Best Games to Play Today. Edge. Vol. 200. Future. April 2009. pp. 5963.
 Nowadays, OoT is not that good. Destructoid. Archived from the original on January 27, 2010. Retrieved February 1, 2010.
 The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time Master Quest reviews. GameRankings. Archived from the original on March 9, 2009. Retrieved March 4, 2008.
 search results. Metacritic. Archived from the original on December 19, 2010. Retrieved May 7, 2008.
 Liu, Johnny February 3, 2003. The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time Master Quest review. Game Revolution. Archived from the original on July 4, 2013. Retrieved October 27, 2007.
External links
Wikiquote has quotations related to: The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time
Official website
vte
The Legend of Zelda series
vte
Games designed and directed by Shigeru Miyamoto
vte
BAFTA Games Award for Best Game
vte
Academy of Interactive Arts  Sciences D.I.C.E. Award for Game of the Year
vte
Japan Game Award for Game of the Year
Authority control Edit this at Wikidata
WorldCat Identities BNF: cb16546892t data GND: 45318220 SUDOC: 184415292 VIAF: 292948890
Triforce.svgThe Legend of Zelda portalNintendo.svgNintendo portalWPVG icon 2016.svgVideo games portalAlcatel 9109HA.png1990s portalFlag of Japan.svgJapan portal
Categories: 1998 video gamesActionadventure gamesAIAS Game of the Year winnersCancelled 64DD gamesInteractive Achievement Award winnersIQue gamesNintendo 64 gamesNintendo Entertainment Analysis and Development gamesGameCube gamesSingleplayer video gamesThe Legend of Zelda video gamesOpen world video gamesVideo games about time travelVideo games scored by Koji KondoVideo games developed in JapanVideo games directed by Shigeru MiyamotoVideo games produced by Shigeru MiyamotoVirtual Console gamesVirtual Console games for WiiVirtual Console games for Wii U

The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild
An image of the Breath of the Wilds boxart
Primary packaging artwork, depicting Link overlooking Hyrule
DevelopersNintendo EPD
PublishersNintendo
DirectorsHidemaro Fujibayashi
ProducersEiji Aonuma
Programmers
Takuhiro Dohta
Kenji Matsutani
Hiroshi Umemiya
ArtistsSatoru Takizawa
WritersAkihito Toda
Composers
Manaka Kataoka
Yasuaki Iwata
Hajime Wakai
SeriesThe Legend of Zelda
PlatformsNintendo Switch, Wii U
ReleaseMarch 3, 2017
GenresActionadventure
ModesSingleplayer
The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wilda is an actionadventure game developed and published by Nintendo. An entry in the longrunning The Legend of Zelda series, it was released for the Nintendo Switch and Wii U consoles on March 3, 2017. The player controls Link, who awakens from a hundredyear slumber to defeat Calamity Ganon before it can destroy the kingdom of Hyrule.

Similarly to the original Legend of Zelda 1986, players are given little instruction and can explore the open world freely. Tasks include collecting multipurpose items to aid in objectives or solving puzzles and side quests for rewards. Breath of the Wilds world is unstructured and designed to reward experimentation, and the story can be completed in a nonlinear fashion. Development of Breath of the Wild lasted five years. Wanting to reinvent the series, Nintendo introduced elements such as a detailed physics engine, highdefinition visuals, and voice acting. Monolith Soft assisted in designing landscapes. The game was planned for release in 2015 as a Wii U exclusive, but was delayed twice due to problems with the physics engine. Breath of the Wild was a launch game for Switch and the final Nintendo game for Wii U. Two downloadable content packs were released later in 2017.

Breath of the Wild received acclaim for its openended gameplay and attention to detail, with many publications describing it as one of the greatest video games of all time. Critics called it a landmark in openworld design, despite minor criticism for its technical performance at launch. It won numerous awards, including several game of the year awards. By September 2018, Breath of the Wild had sold over 11.7 million copies worldwide, making it the bestselling Zelda game.


Contents
1Gameplay
2Plot
3Development
4Promotion and release
4.1Downloadable content
5Reception
5.1Sales
5.2Accolades
6References
7External links
Gameplay
See also: Gameplay of The Legend of Zelda series
An ingame screenshot of the protagonist Link, paragliding across a vast world.
Players are free to explore the world of Breath of the Wild using a variety of tools. For example, by jumping from a high elevation and deploying his paraglider, Link can travel distances quickly.
Breath of the Wild is an actionadventure game set in an open world environment where players are tasked with exploring the kingdom of Hyrule while controlling Link. In terms of structure, Breath of the Wild encourages nonlinear gameplay, which is illustrated by the games lack of defined entrances or exits to areas,1 scant instruction given to the player, and encouragement to explore freely.2 Breath of the Wild introduces a consistent physics engine to the Zelda series, letting players approach problems in different ways rather than trying to find a single solution.3 The game also integrates a chemistry engine that defines the physical properties of most objects and governs how they interact with the player and one another.4 For example, players may take advantage of the games dynamic weather by throwing metal objects at enemies during thunderstorms to attract a lightning strike.5 These design approaches result in a generally unstructured and interactive world that rewards experimentation and allows for nonlinear completion of the story.67

As Link, players can perform actions such as running, climbing, swimming, and gliding with a paraglider, although Link is limited by his stamina.5 Link can procure items from the environment, including weapons, food, and other resources. Unlike previous Zelda games, weapons and shields will degrade over time.5 Many items have multiple uses; for example, wooden weapons and armor can be set to light fires or collect incoming enemy arrows, and shields can be used as makeshift snowboards.5 Players can obtain food from hunting animals, gathering wild fruit, or collecting parts of deceased enemies.6 By cooking combinations of food or materials, the player can create meals and elixirs that can replenish Links health and stamina, or provide temporary status bonuses such as increased strength or weather resistance.6 An important tool in Links arsenal is the Sheikah Slate, which can be used to mark waypoints on a map. Over the course of the game, Link can collect powers to add to the Slate, including remote bombs, the ability to manipulate metal objects, form ice blocks on watery surfaces, and temporarily stopping objects in time.8910 In combat, players can lock onto targets for more precise attacks, while certain button combinations allow for advanced offensive and defensive moves.11 Players may also defeat enemies without weapons, such as rolling boulders off cliffs into enemy camps.12

Besides exploration, players can undergo quests or challenges to obtain certain benefits. Activating towers and shrines adds waypoints that the player may warp to at any time.13 Activating towers also adds territories to the map, although location names are not added until the player explores that area. Dotted throughout Hyrule are shrines that contain challenges ranging from puzzles to battles against robotic opponents. Clearing shrines earns Spirit Orbs, which can be traded for additional health or stamina points.13 Scattered across Hyrule are small puzzles that reveal Korok Seeds, which can be traded to expand inventory size for weapons, shields, and bows.14 Towns serve as hotspots for quests, sidequests and shops selling materials and clothing. Hikers and other travelers offer sidequests, hints, or conversation.511 Additionally, players can scan Amiibo figures against their console to summon items or call Links horse Epona from previous Zelda games and Wolf Link from Twilight Princess.1516

Plot
Breath of the Wild takes place at the end of the Zelda timeline in the kingdom of Hyrule.17 When the evil Calamity Ganon threatens Hyrule, he is defeated by Princess Zelda, descendant of the Goddess Hylia, with the help of her knight, Link.18

Hyrule matured into an advanced civilization, protected by four Divine Beasts enormous animalistic machines and an army of Guardians, autonomous weapons.19 Upon Ganons return, four great warriors were given the title of Champion and piloted one of the Divine Beasts to weaken him, protected by Zelda, Link, and the Guardians. Link struck Ganon down with the Master Sword, allowing Zelda to seal Ganon away.20

10,000 years later, the kingdom of Hyrule regressed to a medieval state.21 Reading their ancestors prophecies, the Hyrulians recognized the signs of Ganons return and excavated the Divine Beasts and Guardians.22 The champions of Hyrules racesDaruk, warrior of the mountainous Goron; Mipha, princess of the aquatic Zora; Revali, archer of the birdlike Rito; and Urbosa, chief of the desertdwelling Gerudoassembled to pilot the Divine Beasts, while Zelda and Link battled Ganon.23 However, Ganon possessed the Guardians and Divine Beasts, turning them against Hyrule. King Rhoam and the Champions were killed, the castle town was destroyed, and Link was gravely wounded.24 Zelda took Link to safety, hid the Master Sword, and used her magic to trap Ganon in Hyrule Castle.25

100 years later, an amnesiac Link awakens in Hyrule. He meets an old man, who reveals himself as the spirit of King Rhoam. Rhoam explains that Ganon, sealed in Hyrule Castle, has grown strong; he pleads for Link to defeat Ganon before he breaks free and destroys the world.26

Link travels Hyrule, returning to locations from his past and regaining his memories. With the help of the Hyrulian races, he boards the four Divine Beasts and purges them of Ganons monsters, releasing the spirits of Hyrules former champions. After obtaining the Master Sword from the Lost Woods, Link enters Hyrule Castle and defeats Ganon with the help of the Divine Beasts and Zeldas Bow of Light. Zelda seals Ganon away, restoring peace and allowing the spirits of King Rhoam and the champions to depart. Zelda realizes that Hyrule must be rebuilt and that she and Link must begin the process themselves.27 If the player fulfills certain conditions, they unlock an alternative ending where Link and Zelda survey Hyrule and talk about rebuilding the world.28

Development
An image of Eiji Aonuma, the producer.
With Breath of the Wild, Zelda series producer Eiji Aonuma sought to rethink series conventions.
The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild was developed by Nintendo EPD, an internal division of Nintendo, for the Wii U initially. According to series producer Eiji Aonuma, the development team aimed to rethink the conventions of Zelda.2930 Following the release of The Legend of Zelda: Skyward Sword in 2011, Aonuma received comments from players who wished to see a more interconnected map to explore the locales between the gameplay areas.3 In 2013, Nintendo experimented with nonlinear, openworld gameplay in The Legend of Zelda: A Link Between Worlds.31 At the 2014 Electronic Entertainment Expo, Aonuma said he planned to reform dungeons and puzzles, two of the series major gameplay elements,32 and redesign the game to allow players to reach the end without progressing through the story.33 As Nintendo had never worked on a modern openworld game before, they took influence from the development of The Elder Scrolls V: Skyrim.34

Prior to full development, the developers designed a playable 2D prototype similar to the original Zelda to experiment with physicsbased puzzles. The final game uses a modified version of the Havok physics engine.35 At the 2017 Game Developers Conference, Director Hidemaro Fujibayashi, technical director Takuhiro Dohta, and art director Satoru Takizawa held a presentation titled Change and Constant  Breaking Conventions with The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild, during which they demoed the prototype.3536 Aonuma called the physics engine in Breath of the Wild a major development for the Zelda series, saying that it underpins everything in the world and makes things operate in a logical and realistic way, allowing players to approach puzzles and problems in different ways. He expanded on the difficulty in developing this system, recalling how one day during development he entered an area in the game and found that all the objects had been blown away by the wind.3

Our mission in developing this new Zelda game ... is quite plainly to rethink the conventions of Zelda. Im referring to the expectation that the player is supposed to complete dungeons in a certain order...we want to set aside these conventions, get back to basics and create a newborn Zelda so that the players can best enjoy the real essence of the franchise.
Eiji Aonuma, producer29
The game was built and demonstrated with touchscreen features for the Wii U, but the developers found that looking away from the main screen distracted from the game. The features were removed when the game moved to tandem development across the Nintendo Switch and Wii U.37 The Wii U GamePad also affected animation; although Link is canonically lefthanded, he is righthanded in the game to match the GamePads control scheme, which has its swordswinging buttons on its right side.38 The Switch version performs better than the Wii U release when docked to a television, although when undocked, both run at the same resolution. The Switch version also has higherquality environmental sounds.3940 Aonuma stated that the art design was inspired by gouache and en plein air art to help identify the vast world.41 The games landscape was based on locations in and around Kyoto, the hometown of game director Hidemaro Fujibayashi, and was partially designed by Monolith Soft, who assisted with topographical level design.424344

I really think the implementation of this physics engine is a major development for the Zelda series. The way the physics engine underpins everything in the world really offers up a lot of new possibilities. For instance, in Breath of the Wild you might have a puzzle where making use of the physics, therell be various ways you can solve that puzzle. That really opens up a lot of possibilities so theres not just one way to progress in the game or just one way to solve a puzzle.
Eiji Aonuma, producer3
Breath of the Wild was the first main Zelda game to use voice acting in cutscenes, although Link remains a silent protagonist. Aonuma was affected by the first time he heard a character with a human voice ingame, and wanted to leave a similar impression on players.45 The team decided to record voiceovers for all cutscenes instead of only the key scenes, as originally planned.4647 Nintendo provided voiceovers and subtitles in eight languages.b Initially, players were not able to mix and match the languages of voices and subtitles;48 however, Nintendo released an update in May 2017 that allowed players to choose the voiceover language.49 The game went gold on February 3, 2017, with Nintendo holding a wrap party to celebrate.50 Coinciding with the games launch in Taiwan and South Korea in early 2018, Nintendo introduced a patch worldwide adding traditional and simplified Chinese and Korean translations for the Nintendo Switch version.c515253

The original score was composed by Manaka Kataoka, Yasuaki Iwata, and Hajime Wakai. Kataoka and Wakai had previously worked on the Zelda games Spirit Tracks54 and The Wind Waker respectively.55 The soundtrack was primarily written and performed on a piano, with a focus on ambient music and sounds rather than the melodic and upbeat music in previous Zelda games. According to Wakai, this helped add authenticity to the environments, and was taken on as a challenge by the rest of the sound team.56

Promotion and release
Aonuma announced a new entry for Nintendos Wii U console in January 2013 during the companys regular online presentation. The game, he continued, would challenge the series conventions, such as the requirement that players complete dungeons in a set order.257 The next year, Nintendo introduced the games highdefinition, celshaded visual style with ingame footage at its June 2014 Electronic Entertainment Expo press event.5859 Once planned for release in 2015, the game was delayed early in the year and did not show at that years E3.6061 Zelda series creator Shigeru Miyamoto reaffirmed that the game was still set for release on the Wii U, despite the development of Nintendos next console, the Nintendo Switch.62 The game was delayed again in April 2016 due to problems with its physics engine. Nintendo let attendees play the games Wii U version at E3 2016,63 where they also announced its subtitle, Breath of the Wild.64 CNET said that the showing would take your breath away,65 and Breath of the Wild was the most talkedabout E3 2016 game on social media according to Brandwatch, a social media monitoring platform.66 It was also listed among the best games at E3 by Eurogamer,67 GameSpot,68 and GamesRadar.6970 At a Nintendo presentation in January 2017, Nintendo showed a new trailer announcing that the game would be released as a launch game for the Switch.71

Breath of the Wild launched for both the Wii U and Switch on March 3, 2017.72 It was the last Nintendo game released for the Wii U.73 The Switch version was available in limited Special Edition and Master Edition bundles, which both included a Sheikah Eye coin, a Calamity Ganon tapestry with world map, a soundtrack CD, and a themed carrying case for the Switch. The Master Edition also included a figurine based on the Master Sword.747576 An Explorers Edition was released for the Switch on November 23, 2017, containing a twosided map and a 100page book of story information.77 In Europe, the game used unique packing artwork.78 A fivedisc, 211track soundtrack was released in Japan on April 25, 2018.79

Downloadable content
On June 30, 2017, Nintendo released a season pass for two bundled downloadable content DLC: The Master Trials and The Champions Ballad.8081 The Master Trials adds gameplay modes, features, and items. In the Trial of the Sword challenge, Link fights through around 45 rooms of enemies and must finish each room before proceeding. Link begins with no equipment, but is rewarded with a glowing Master Sword that has greater durability and possesses a doubled damage stat if the player completes the challenge. The pack also adds an option to play the game at a higher difficulty level, which adds ranks and raises the ranks of enemies. The enemies are more perceptive when Link sneaks near them and slowly regenerate health in battle. New floating platforms throughout the land offer enemies to battle and treasure as a reward. The Heros Path feature draws the players path on the games map, designed to help players determine places they have not visited. The player can also find the hidden Travel Medallion to save Links current position as a single waypoint to which the player can transport Link at any time. New items include the Korok Mask, which helps the player find Korok locations, and other themed cosmetics related to previous Zelda games.82

The Champions Ballad was released on December 7, 2017, with a trailer presented at The Game Awards 2017 exhibiting the new content. The expansion pack adds a new dungeon, original story, gear, and additional challenges.818384 It also introduces the Master Cycle Zero, a motorcyclelike vehicle that Link can ride after players complete the packs additional content.85

Reception
Reception
Aggregate score
AggregatorScore
MetacriticNS 9710086
Wii U 9610087
Review scores
PublicationScore
Destructoid101088
Edge101089
EGM9.51090
EurogamerEssential91
Famitsu404092
Game Informer101093
Game Revolution55 stars94
GameSpot10105
GamesRadar55 stars95
Giant Bomb55 stars96
IGN10106
Nintendo Life1010 stars97
Nintendo World Report9.51098
Polygon101099
VideoGamer.com910100
Breath of the Wild was released to critical acclaim, with some calling the game a masterpiece106 and one of the greatest video games of all time.107108 On the review aggregator Metacritic, Breath of the Wild was the highestrated game of 2017109 and holds the largest number of perfect reviews of any game from any year.110111112 Industry publications including IGN,113 GameSpot,114 Polygon,115116 Entertainment Weekly,117 Eurogamer,118 Electronic Gaming Monthly,119 GamesRadar,120 and Game Informer121 ranked Breath of the Wild the best game of 2017. It was the 29th game including retrospective perfect scores to earn a 1010 score from Edge89 and the 24th game to receive a 4040 score from Famitsu.122

The openworld gameplay received praise. Jose Otero of IGN described it as a masterclass in openworld design and a wonderful sandbox full of mystery, dangling dozens upon dozens of tantalizing things in front of you that just beg to be explored.6 GameSpot called it the most impressive game Nintendo had made, writing that it takes designs and mechanics perfected in other games and reworks them for its own purposes to create something wholly new, but also something that still feels quintessentially like a Zelda game ... Its both a return to form and a leap into uncharted territory, and it exceeds expectations on both fronts.5 Edge wrote that the game world was an absolute, and unremitting, pleasure to get lost in and that the magic of being given all the tools in the opening hour is the knowledge that the solution to any problem is already at your disposal, and you can always change tack.89

According to Kyle Orland of Ars Technica, after spending a week utterly immersed in Nintendos openworld reimagining of the triedandtrue Zelda formula, its hard to return to the more formulaic entries of the franchises past.123 Journalists commented on unexpected results not intended by the developers,124125126 with serendipitous moments proving popular on social media.127 Chris Plante of The Verge predicted that whereas prior openworld games tended to feature prescribed challenges, Zelda would influence a new generation of games with openended problemsolving.127

Reviewers lauded the sense of detail and immersion.128124 Kotaku recommended turning off UI elements in praise of the indirect cues that contextually indicate the same information, such as Link shivering in the cold or waypoints appearing when using the scope.128 Reviewers also commented on the unexpected permutations of interactions between Link, villagers, pets, and enemies,124125126, many of which were shared widely on social media.127 A tribute to former Nintendo president Satoru Iwata, who died during development, also attracted praise.124129

Jim Sterling was more critical than most, giving Breath of the Wild a 710 score. He criticized the difficulty, weapon durability, and level design, but praised the open world and variety of content.130 Other criticism focused on the unstable frame rate and the low resolution of 900p;128124 updates addressed some of these problems.131132

Sales
Breath of the Wild broke sales records for a Nintendo launch game in multiple regions.133134 In Japan, the Switch and Wii U versions sold a combined 230,000 copies in the first week of release, with the Switch version becoming the topselling game released that week.135 In the UK, Breath of the Wild was the secondbestselling retail game its week of release behind Horizon Zero Dawn, and became the thirdbestselling Zelda game behind Wind Waker and Twilight Princess.136137 In the United States, Breath of the Wild was the secondbestselling video game during its month of release behind Tom Clancys Ghost Recon Wildlands.138 Nintendo reported that Breath of the Wild sold more than one million copies in the US that month, 925,000 of which were for Switch  a 100 attach rate.139140141142 That month, Nintendo reported it had sold 3.84 million copies of Breath of the Wild worldwide, 1.08 million for Wii U and 2.76 million for Switch, surpassing the Switchs global sales of 2.74 million for the same period.143 Nintendo president Tatsumi Kimishima said that the attach rate of Breath of the Wild to the Switch was unprecedented.144 By June 2018, the Switch version had sold 9.32 million copies,145 and the Wii U version 1.5 million, for a total of 10.82 million, making Breath of the Wild the bestselling Zelda game.146 By September 2018, the Switch version reached 10.28 million copies sold.147

The games success sparked increased interest in the Wii U emulator Cemu, as the Cemu developers rapidly updated the software to run the game at a smooth frame rate within weeks of release.148149150

Accolades
Following its demonstration at E3 2016, Breath of the Wild received several accolades from the Game Critics Awards151 and from publications such as IGN and Destructoid.152153 It was listed among the best games at E3 by Eurogamer,67 GameSpot,68 and GamesRadar.6970 In late 2016, Breath of the Wild received two awards at Gamescom,154 and won the award for Most Anticipated Game at The Game Awards 2016.155

After its release, Breath of the Wild won multiple awards at The Game Awards 2017, including Game of the Year, Best Game Direction, and Best ActionAdventure Game, and was nominated for Best Art Direction, Best ScoreMusic, and Best Audio Design.156 At the 2018 DICE Awards, it won Game of the Year among other awards.157

AwardDate of ceremonyCategoryResultRef.
Game Critics AwardsJuly 5, 2016Best ActionAdventure GameWon158
Best Console GameWon
Best of ShowWon
The Game Awards 2016December 1, 2016Most Anticipated GameWon159
2017 Teen Choice AwardsAugust 13, 2017Choice Video GameNominated160
Japan Game AwardsSeptember 21, 2017The Grand AwardWon161
BBC Radio 1s Teen AwardsOctober 22, 2017Best GameNominated162
Golden Joystick AwardsNovember 17, 2017Best Visual DesignNominated163
164
Best AudioWon
Critics Choice AwardWon
Nintendo Game of the YearWon
Ultimate Game of the YearWon
The Game Awards 2017December 7, 2017Game of the YearWon156
Best Game DirectionWon
Best Art DirectionNominated
Best ScoreMusicNominated
Best Audio DesignNominated
Best ActionAdventure GameWon
New York Game AwardsJanuary 24, 2018Big Apple Award for Best Game of the YearWon165
Tin Pan Alley Award for Best Music in a GameNominated
Statue of Liberty Award for Best WorldWon
D.I.C.E. AwardsFebruary 22, 2018Game of the YearWon157
Outstanding Achievement in Art DirectionNominated
Outstanding Technical AchievementNominated
Adventure Game of the YearWon
Outstanding Achievement in Game DesignWon
Outstanding Achievement in Game DirectionWon
NAVGTR AwardsMarch 13, 2018Art Direction, FantasyWon166
167
Control Design, 3DNominated
Game Design, FranchiseNominated
Game of the YearNominated
Game, Franchise FamilyNominated
Original Light Mix Score, FranchiseWon
SXSW Gaming AwardsMarch 17, 2018Excellence in Musical ScoreNominated168
169
Excellence in AnimationNominated
Excellence in ArtNominated
Excellence in GameplayWon
Excellence in DesignWon
Video Game of the YearWon
Game Developers Choice AwardsMarch 21, 2018Best AudioWon170
171
Best DesignWon
Innovation AwardNominated
Best TechnologyNominated
Best Visual ArtNominated
Game of the YearWon
14th British Academy Games AwardsApril 12, 2018Artistic AchievementNominated172
173
Best GameNominated
Game DesignNominated
Game InnovationWon
MusicNominated
2018 Teen Choice AwardsAugust 12, 2018Choice Video GameNominated174
175
References
Notes

 Japanese:      Hepburn: Zeruda no Densetsu: Buresu obu za Wairudo?
 Languages include Dutch, English, French, German, Italian, Japanese, Russian, and Spanish. The Dutch localization is text only and borrows the English voiceover by default, whilst the Spanish localization include two different voiceover tracks for different regions.
 The Chinese and Korean localization is text only and borrows the Japanese voiceover by default.
Citations

 Goldfarb, Andrew June 14, 2016. E3 2016: Zelda: Breath of the Wilds Open World is 12 Times Bigger than Twilight Princess. IGN. Ziff Davis. Archived from the original on June 14, 2016. Retrieved June 14, 2016.
 George, Richard January 23, 2013. New HD Zelda Revealed for Wii U. IGN. Ziff Davis. Archived from the original on January 26, 2013. Retrieved June 16, 2014.
 Phillips, Tom January 19, 2017. The big Zelda: Breath of the Wild interview. Eurogamer. Archived from the original on December 14, 2017. Retrieved May 17, 2018.
 Gray, Kate May 30, 2017. Is The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild the bestdesigned game ever?. Theguardian.com. Archived from the original on November 22, 2017. Retrieved November 2, 2017.
 Brown, Peter March 2, 2017. The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild Review. GameSpot. Archived from the original on March 3, 2017. Retrieved March 2, 2017.
 Otero, Jose March 2, 2017. The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild Review. IGN. Archived from the original on March 2, 2017. Retrieved March 2, 2017.
 Why Breath of the Wild is the future of blockbuster games. Theverge.com. Archived from the original on March 27, 2017. Retrieved November 2, 2017.
 Sliva, Marty December 5, 2014. New Gameplay Shown From The Legend of Zelda Wii U. IGN. Ziff Davis. Archived from the original on December 6, 2014. Retrieved December 6, 2014.
 Pereira, Chris February 17, 2015. Zelda Wii Us Open World Is as Big as the System Can Handle. GameSpot. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on June 21, 2015. Retrieved June 21, 2015.
 Phillips, Tom June 14, 2016. The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild is the most ambitious Nintendo game in years. Eurogamer. Gamer Network. Archived from the original on June 15, 2016. Retrieved June 14, 2016.
 Tach, David March 2, 2017. The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild beginners guide. Polygon. Archived from the original on April 26, 2017. Retrieved November 9, 2017.
 Tassi, Paul March 13, 2017. Two Skills Break Zelda: Breath of the Wilds Otherwise Creative Combat. Forbes. Archived from the original on June 20, 2017. Retrieved November 9, 2017.
 Hilliard, Kyle February 10, 2017. Everything We Know About The Legend Of Zelda: Breath Of The Wilds Dungeons. Game Informer. GameStop. Archived from the original on February 16, 2017. Retrieved April 4, 2017.
 Phillips, Tom March 15, 2017. The reward for collecting all 900 Zelda: Breath of the Wild Korok seeds is a bit poo. Eurogamer. Gamer Network. Archived from the original on March 24, 2017. Retrieved April 4, 2017.
 Crecente, Brian June 14, 2016. The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild gets three new Amiibo, here they are. Polygon. Vox Media. Archived from the original on June 15, 2016. Retrieved August 25, 2016.
 Kollar, Philip March 8, 2017. You can unlock Links classic green tunic in The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild. Polygon. Archived from the original on March 8, 2017. Retrieved March 8, 2017.
 Arif, Shabana. The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild Now Has an Official Place in the Series Timeline... Sort Of. IGN. Retrieved August 6, 2018.
 Nintendo. The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild. Impa: The history of the royal family of Hyrule is also the history of Calamity Canon, a primal evil that has endured over the ages. This evil has been turned back time and time again by a warrior wielding the soul of a hero and a princess who carries the blood of the Goddess. With the passage of time, each conflict with Ganon faded into legend. So listen closely as I tell you of this legend that occurred 10,000 years ago.
 Nintendo. The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild. Impa: Hyrule was then blossoming as a highly advanced civilization... the people thought it wise to utilize their technological prowess to ensure the safety of the land should Calamity Ganon ever return. They constructed... the Divine Beasts. They also built a legion of autonomous weapons called guardians.
 Nintendo. The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild. Impa: The Divine Beasts were piloted by four individuals of exceptional skill from across the land. And thus, the plan to neutralize Ganon was forged... The princess and the hero fought alongside these four Champions against this ancient evil. The Guardians were tasked with protecting the hero, as the Divine Beasts unleashed a furious attack... And when the hero wielding the sword that seals the darkness delivered his final blow, the princess used her sacred power to seal away Calamity Ganon.
 Nintendo. The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild. Princess Zeldas Research Notes: In the war against the Calamity 10,000 years ago ... were the injuries so great as to necessitate such a facility?
 Nintendo. The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild. King Rhoam: There was also a prophecy. The signs of a resurrection of Calamity Ganon are clear, and the power to oppose it lies dormant beneath the ground. We decided to heed the prophecy and began excavating large areas of land.
 Nintendo. The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild. King Rhoam: The princess, her appointed knight, and the rest of the Champions were on the brink of sealing away Ganon... But nay...
 Nintendo. The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild. King Rhoam: Ganon seized control of the Guardians and the Divine Beasts and turned them against us. The Champions lost their lives. Those residing in the castle as well. The appointed knight, gravely wounded, collapsed while defending the princess. And thus, the Kingdom of Hyrule was devastated absolutely by Calamity Ganon.
 Nintendo. The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild. King Rhoam: However, the princess survived... to face Ganon alone.
 Otero, Jose June 14, 2016. E3 2016: The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild Might Be The Open World Zelda We Always Wanted. IGN. Ziff Davis. Archived from the original on June 14, 2016. Retrieved June 14, 2016.
 Nintendo. The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild. Zelda: Although Ganon is gone, for now, there is still so much for us to do. ... I believe in my heart, that if all of us work together, we can restore Hyrule to its former glory. Perhaps... even beyond. But it all must start with us.
 Pritchard, Tom January 21, 2017. Breath of the Wild Will Have an Alternate Ending. kotaku.co.uk. Future plc. Retrieved January 21, 2017.
 Narcisse, Evan October 14, 2013. The Man In Charge of Zelda Says He Wants to Keep Changing It. Kotaku. Gawker Media. Archived from the original on October 15, 2013. Retrieved June 20, 2014.
 East, Thomas January 23, 2013. Zelda Wii U to rethink conventions of Zelda  will it be multiplayer?. Official Nintendo Magazine. Future. Archived from the original on June 23, 2013. Retrieved June 20, 2014.
 Smith, Carly October 1, 2013. Zelda: A Link Between Worlds Will Depart From Conventions. The Escapist. Defy Media. Archived from the original on October 2, 2013. Retrieved June 20, 2014.
 Schreier, Jason June 13, 2014. The New Zelda Might Not Have The Puzzles You Expect. Kotaku. Gawker Media. Archived from the original on June 14, 2014. Retrieved June 20, 2014.
 Kollar, Philip. You can beat The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild without finishing the story. Polygon. Archived from the original on June 16, 2016. Retrieved June 16, 2016.
 Newhouse, Alex. How Skyrim Influenced Breath Of The Wild. GameSpot. Archived from the original on December 24, 2017. Retrieved January 21, 2018.
 Machkovech, Sam March 1, 2017. Nintendo used 8bit Zelda engine to prototype Breath of the Wild. Ars Technica. San Francisco: Cond Nast. Archived from the original on March 4, 2017. Retrieved March 9, 2017.
 Staff February 13, 2017. The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild devs are speaking at GDC 2017!. GDC News. UBM. Retrieved February 13, 2017.
 Otero, Jose March 1, 2017. Why Zelda: Breath of the Wilds Touchscreen Features Were Cut. IGN. Archived from the original on March 2, 2017. Retrieved March 8, 2017.
 Haywald, Justin June 14, 2016. Why Zelda: Breath of the Wilds Link is RightHanded. GameSpot. Archived from the original on June 15, 2016. Retrieved June 15, 2016.
 Hillier, Brenna January 18, 2017. How The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild is better on Switch than Wii U. VG247. Archived from the original on May 1, 2017. Retrieved March 24, 2017.
 When docked, the Switch runs at 900p resolution, and when undocked, it runs at the screens maximum 720p. The Wii U has the latters maximum resolution. All versions run at 30 frames per second.39
 Peckham, Matt. Why Nintendo Had to Destroy Tradition to Create the New Zelda. TIME.com. Archived from the original on June 17, 2016. Retrieved June 18, 2016.
 Reeves, Ben June 20, 2016. Monolith Is Helping Work On The Legend Of Zelda: Breath Of The Wild. Game Informer. Archived from the original on July 15, 2016. Retrieved July 13, 2016.
 Casey. Monolith Softs Role In The Development Of The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild. Siliconera. Archived from the original on February 1, 2017. Retrieved February 2, 2017.
 Webster, Andrew. The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wilds map is based on Kyoto. The Verge. Archived from the original on March 7, 2017. Retrieved March 6, 2017.
 Kollar, Philip June 21, 2016. Why The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild is getting voice acting and scifi elements. Polygon. Archived from the original on January 26, 2017. Retrieved March 8, 2017.
 Lopez, Jason January 26, 2017. Every cutscene in The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild will have voice acting. GameZone. Retrieved March 8, 2017.
 Craddock, David January 25, 2017. Zelda producer says all cutscenes in Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild will feature voice acting. Shacknews. Archived from the original on February 1, 2017. Retrieved March 8, 2017.
 Frank, Allegra; Robinson, Nick February 27, 2017. How to play The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild in nine languages. Polygon. Archived from the original on March 1, 2017. Retrieved March 8, 2017.
 Plunkett, Luke. You Can Now Play Zelda: Breath Of The Wild With Japanese Vocals. Kotaku. Archived from the original on May 2, 2017. Retrieved May 2, 2017.
 Phillips, Tom. Lets take a look inside Nintendos Zelda: Breath of the Wild wrap party. Eurogamer. Archived from the original on February 6, 2017. Retrieved February 7, 2017.
 Dale, Laura Kate. Nintendo is Localising Breath of the Wild into Chinese. Kotaku. Archived from the original on January 14, 2018. Retrieved September 28, 2017.
 ,        2018    ! in Korean. Nintendo of Korea press release. September 27, 2017. Archived from the original on September 27, 2017. Retrieved September 28, 2017.
 2018   in Chinese. Nintendo Taiwan press release. September 27, 2017. Archived from the original on September 27, 2017. Retrieved September 28, 2017.
 Under the maiden name of Manaka Tominaga
 Greening, Chris. Full sound team for Zelda: Breath of the Wild revealed. Video Game Music Online. Archived from the original on March 2, 2017. Retrieved March 6, 2017.
 The Making of The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild Video  OpenAir Concept Video. YouTube. Nintendo. March 14, 2017. Archived from the original on October 24, 2017. Retrieved November 21, 2017.
 Lemon, Marshall. Zelda: Breath of the Wild lets you skip ahead to later dungeons. VG247. Archived from the original on June 18, 2016. Retrieved June 27, 2016.
 Boxer, Steve June 10, 2014. Nintendo at E3: Zelda and Star Fox for Wii U a muchneed shot in the arm. The Guardian. Archived from the original on June 10, 2014. Retrieved June 21, 2015.
 Farokhmanesh, Megan June 10, 2014. New Legend of Zelda game for Wii U coming in 2015. Polygon. Vox Media. Archived from the original on June 10, 2014. Retrieved June 16, 2014.
 McWhertor, Michael March 27, 2015. The Legend of Zelda Wii U delayed beyond 2015, skipping E3. Polygon. Vox Media. Archived from the original on March 28, 2015. Retrieved March 28, 2015.
 Otero, Jose June 17, 2015. E3 2015: Why Nintendo Didnt Show Zelda Wii U. IGN. Ziff Davis. Archived from the original on June 18, 2015. Retrieved June 18, 2015.
 Otero, Jose June 16, 2015. E3 2015: The Legend of Zelda Still Coming to Wii U. IGN. Ziff Davis. Archived from the original on June 17, 2015. Retrieved June 28, 2015.
 Farokhmanesh, Megan May 25, 2016. E3 2016 for Nintendo: Facts, rumors and speculation. Polygon. Vox Media. Archived from the original on May 25, 2016. Retrieved June 17, 2016.
 Brown, Peter. New Zelda Game Gets Official Title. GameSpot. Archived from the original on June 17, 2016. Retrieved June 16, 2016.
 Kooser, Amanda June 14, 2016. New Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild trailer will take your breath away. CNET. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on June 14, 2016. Retrieved June 15, 2016.
 Joyce, Gemma June 15, 2016. Social Media Reacts to E3 2016. Brandwatch. Archived from the original on June 19, 2016. Retrieved June 15, 2016.
 Welsh, Oli June 17, 2016. Eurogamers best of E3 2016. Eurogamer. Gamer Network. Archived from the original on June 20, 2016. Retrieved June 20, 2016.
 Espineli, Matt August 19, 2016. GameSpot Best of E3 2016 Awards. GameSpot. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on June 19, 2016. Retrieved June 20, 2016.
 Our best games of E3 2016. GamesRadar. Future. June 17, 2016. Archived from the original on June 20, 2016. Retrieved June 20, 2016.
 The E3 2016 awards. GamesRadar. Future. June 17, 2016. Archived from the original on September 3, 2016. Retrieved September 11, 2016.
 Machkovech, Sam January 13, 2017. Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild will launch dayanddate with Nintendo Switch. Ars Technica. Cond Nast. Archived from the original on January 13, 2017. Retrieved January 13, 2017.
 Otero, Jose June 17, 2016. E3 2016: Why Zelda: Breath of the Wild Is Coming To Wii U And NX. IGN. Ziff Davis. Archived from the original on June 17, 2016. Retrieved June 17, 2016.
 Stark, Chelsea January 19, 2017. Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild will be the last Nintendo game for Wii U. Polygon. Vox Media. Archived from the original on January 19, 2017. Retrieved January 19, 2017.
 Frank, Allegra. The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild gets Switch launch day release date. Polygon. Archived from the original on January 14, 2017.
 Dornbush, Jonathon. The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild Special, Master Editions Announced. IGN. Archived from the original on January 13, 2017. Retrieved January 13, 2017.
 Switch vs. Wii U: All the Zelda: Breath of the Wild Differences. GameSpot. Archived from the original on January 27, 2017. Retrieved January 18, 2017.
 Carter, Chris November 24, 2017. Official Zelda: Breath of the Wild Explorers Edition is out this week. Destructoid. Archived from the original on November 26, 2017. Retrieved December 5, 2017.
 YinPoole, Wesley January 13, 2017. Lets compare and contrast the US and European Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild box art. Eurogamer. Gamer Network Reed Exhibitions. Archived from the original on March 13, 2018. Retrieved March 13, 2018.
 Strawhun, Aiden. LimitedEdition Zelda: Breath Of The Wild Complete Soundtrack Releasing This April In Japan. GameSpot. Archived from the original on March 4, 2018. Retrieved March 4, 2018.
 Kuchera, Ben June 13, 2017. See Zelda: Breath of the Wilds two expansions in action. Polygon. Archived from the original on January 14, 2018.
 Webster, Andrew February 14, 2017. The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild is getting 20 worth of downloadable extras. The Verge. Archived from the original on February 14, 2017.
 Peckham, Matt. Not Finishing Breath of the Wild Just Got Easier. Time. Archived from the original on June 7, 2017.
 Nintendo UK August 7, 2017, The Art of Legend of Zelda Series Masterclass, archived from the original on September 24, 2017, retrieved August 9, 2017
 Robinson, Martin July 7, 2017. In Breath of the Wilds The Champions Ballad you will be playing as Link. Eurogamer. Archived from the original on July 12, 2017.
 Pereira, Chris December 7, 2017. Zelda: Breath Of The Wilds Champions Ballad DLC Launches Tonight. GameSpot. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on December 8, 2017. Retrieved December 7, 2017.
 The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild for Switch Reviews. Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on March 3, 2017. Retrieved March 2, 2017.
 The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild for Wii U Reviews. Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on March 31, 2017. Retrieved March 2, 2017.
 Carter, Chris March 2, 2017. Review: The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild. Destructoid. Archived from the original on March 3, 2017. Retrieved March 2, 2017.
 The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild. Edge. No. 304. Future. April 2017. pp. 104107.
 Schaefer, Emma March 2, 2017. The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild review. EGMNow. Archived from the original on March 2, 2017. Retrieved March 2, 2017.
 Welsh, Oli March 2, 2017. The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild review. Eurogamer. Archived from the original on March 3, 2017. Retrieved March 2, 2017.
 Romano, Sal March 1, 2017. Famitsu Review Scores: Issue 1474. Gematsu. Archived from the original on May 1, 2017. Retrieved March 1, 2017.
 Hilliard, Kyle March 2, 2017. A New Era Dawns On Zelda  The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild  Nintendo Switch. Game Informer. Archived from the original on March 3, 2017. Retrieved March 2, 2017.
 Leack, Jonathan March 1, 2017. The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild Review. Game Revolution. Retrieved March 1, 2017.
 Castle, Matthew March 2, 2017. The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild review: Its taken 18 years, but Nintendo has done it again: this is the adventure game to beat.. GamesRadar. Archived from the original on March 3, 2017. Retrieved March 2, 2017.
 Ryckert, Dan March 2, 2017. The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild Review. Giant Bomb. Archived from the original on March 3, 2017. Retrieved March 2, 2017.
 Whitehead, Thomas March 2, 2017. The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild Review. Nintendo Life. Retrieved March 2, 2017.
 Ronaghan, Neal March 2, 2017. The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild Review. Nintendo World Report. Retrieved March 2, 2017.
 Gies, Arthur March 2, 2017. The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild review. Polygon. Archived from the original on March 3, 2017. Retrieved March 2, 2017.
 Bell, Alice March 2, 2017. The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild Review. VideoGamer.com. Archived from the original on March 3, 2017. Retrieved March 2, 2017.
 Peckham, Matt March 2, 2017. Review: Breath of the Wild Is a Masterpiece Zelda Game. Time. Archived from the original on March 28, 2017. Retrieved March 24, 2017.
 Morales, Aaron March 14, 2017. The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild Is a Masterpiece: EW review. Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on April 1, 2017. Retrieved March 24, 2017.
 Otero, Jose March 2, 2017. The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild Review. IGN. p. 2. Archived from the original on March 21, 2017. Retrieved March 24, 2017.
 Leadbetter, Richard March 3, 2017. Zelda on Switch runs more smoothly in portable mode. Eurogamer. Archived from the original on March 6, 2017. Retrieved March 24, 2017.
 Gerardi, Matt; Purdom, Clayton March 17, 2017. Is The Legend Of Zelda: Breath Of The Wild one of the best games of all time?. The A.V. Club. Retrieved March 24, 2017.
 Reviewers who called the game a masterpiece include those of Time,101 Entertainment Weekly,102 IGN,103 Eurogamer,104 and The A.V. Club.105
 The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild Declared As The Greatest Game of All Time By EDGE Magazine   GamingBolt.com: Video Game News, Reviews, Previews and Blog. gamingbolt.com. Archived from the original on January 14, 2018. Retrieved September 2, 2017.
 Persona 5 Voted As The Greatest Game of All Time By Famitsu Magazine   GamingBolt.com: Video Game News, Reviews, Previews and Blog. gamingbolt.com. Archived from the original on January 14, 2018. Retrieved September 2, 2017.
 Best Video Games for 2017. Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Retrieved August 29, 2017.
 Hillier, Brenna March 8, 2017. Zelda: Breath of the Wild has the most perfect review scores in Metacritics history. VG247. Archived from the original on April 4, 2017. Retrieved March 24, 2017.
 Kuchera, Ben March 2, 2017. Zelda: Breath of the Wild is already one of the bestreviewed games of all time. Polygon. Archived from the original on March 18, 2017. Retrieved March 24, 2017.
 Schreier, Jason March 2, 2017. The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild: The Kotaku Review. Kotaku. Archived from the original on March 13, 2017. Retrieved March 24, 2017.
 Best of 2017 Awards: Game of the Year. IGN. December 20, 2017. Archived from the original on December 4, 2017. Retrieved December 27, 2017.
 Brown, Peter December 20, 2017. GameSpots Game Of the Year 2017  The Legend Of Zelda: Breath Of The Wild. GameSpot. Archived from the original on December 22, 2017. Retrieved December 21, 2017.
 Tach, Dave December 15, 2017. Our 1 game of the year: The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild. Polygon. Archived from the original on December 18, 2017. Retrieved December 21, 2017.
 Polygon staff December 18, 2017. The 50 best games of 2017. Polygon. Archived from the original on January 21, 2018. Retrieved February 13, 2018.
 Morales, Aaron; Abrams, Natalie December 29, 2017. The Years Best Games. Entertainment Weekly. No. 149697. pp. 9294. Retrieved December 27, 2017.
 Eurogamer staff December 30, 2017. Eurogamers Top 50 Games of 2017: 101. Eurogamer. Archived from the original on December 31, 2017. Retrieved December 30, 2017.
 EGM staff December 31, 2017. EGMs Best of 2017: Part Five: 5  1. EGMNow. Archived from the original on January 7, 2018. Retrieved January 14, 2018.
 GamesRadar staff December 22, 2017. The best games of 2017: Page 3. GamesRadar. Archived from the original on March 26, 2018. Retrieved March 25, 2018.
 Game Informer staff January 4, 2018. Game Informers Best Of 2017 Awards. Game Informer. Archived from the original on January 8, 2018. Retrieved January 5, 2018.
 Davidson, Joey March 1, 2017. Zelda: Breath of the Wild gets Famitsus 24th perfect score. TechnoBuffalo. Archived from the original on April 27, 2017. Retrieved March 26, 2013.
 Orland, Kyle March 3, 2017. Breath of the Wild may be the best Zelda game ever. Ars Technica. Archived from the original on March 30, 2017. Retrieved March 31, 2017.
 Oxford, Nadia March 16, 2017. Here Are the Coolest Things People Have Discovered About Zelda: Breath of the Wild. USgamer. Archived from the original on April 30, 2017. Retrieved March 24, 2017.
 Kuchera, Ben March 8, 2017. Zelda: Breath of the Wild definitely reacts when you play naked. Polygon. Archived from the original on March 9, 2017. Retrieved March 8, 2017.
 Frank, Allegra March 7, 2017. Breath of the Wild would be a perfect game if you could just pet the dogs. Polygon. Archived from the original on March 8, 2017. Retrieved March 8, 2017.
 Plante, Chris March 17, 2017. Why Breath of the Wild is the future of blockbuster games. The Verge. Archived from the original on March 24, 2017. Retrieved March 24, 2017.
 Hamilton, Kirk March 4, 2017. If Youre Playing Zelda: Breath Of The Wild, Turn Off The Minimap. Kotaku. Archived from the original on March 4, 2017. Retrieved March 8, 2017.
 Kuchera, Ben March 15, 2017. Zelda: Breath of the Wilds alleged Iwata tribute is beautiful. Polygon. Retrieved March 24, 2017.
 Sterling, Jim. The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild Review  Broken Sword  The Jimquisition. www.thejimquisition.com. Retrieved March 24, 2017.
 Zelda: Breath of the Wild patch improves frame rates. Polygon.com. Archived from the original on April 1, 2017. Retrieved May 13, 2017.
 Zelda: Breath of the Wild patch improves docked Switch performance. endgadget.com. Archived from the original on April 17, 2017. Retrieved May 13, 2017.
 Dornbush, Jonathon March 10, 2017. What Does the Nintendo Switch, Breath of the Wild Launch Success Actually Mean?. IGN. Archived from the original on March 14, 2017. Retrieved March 15, 2017.
 In the Americas, the title surpassed Super Mario 64 as Nintendos fastestselling standalone launch game, not including titles included with consoles, such as Wii Sports. In Europe, Australia, and New Zealand, Breath of the Wild outsold even Wii Sports in its opening weekend.133
 Ashcraft, Brian March 9, 2017. The Nintendo Switchs First Week Game Sales In Japan. Kotaku. Archived from the original on March 30, 2017. Retrieved March 24, 2017.
 Parfitt, Ben March 6, 2017. Horizon Zero Dawn beats Zelda to No.1. MCV UK. Archived from the original on March 21, 2017. Retrieved March 24, 2017.
 Dayus, Oscar March 6, 2017. Top 10 UK Sales Chart: Horizon Zero Dawn Defeats Zelda: Breath Of The Wild. GameSpot. Archived from the original on March 9, 2017. Retrieved June 30, 2017.
 Zelda: Breath Of The Wild outsells Horizon Zero Dawn in US. GameCentral. April 21, 2017. Archived from the original on June 28, 2017. Retrieved June 30, 2017.
 Gartenberg, Chaim March 22, 2017. The Xbox One is struggling because video game exclusives still matter. The Verge. Archived from the original on March 23, 2017. Retrieved March 24, 2017.
 Khan, Asif March 14, 2017. Nintendo has sold 1.5 million Switch Consoles According to SuperData. Shacknews. Retrieved March 24, 2017.
 Schreier, Jason April 13, 2017. Nintendo Sells Nearly A Million Switches In The United States. Kotaku. Archived from the original on April 14, 2017. Retrieved April 13, 2017.
 Hidalgo, Jason. Technobubble: Switch fastestselling Nintendo system, Zelda Switch attach rate above 100. Reno GazetteJournal. USA Today. Retrieved April 16, 2017.
 Makuch, Eddie April 27, 2017. Nintendo Switch Ships 2.74 Million Units Worldwide. GameSpot. Retrieved April 27, 2017.
 Sinclair, Brendan April 28, 2017. Switch boasts 2:1 software tie ratio. GamesIndustry.biz. Archived from the original on April 28, 2017. Retrieved April 28, 2017.
 Sales Data  Top Selling Title Sales Units. IR Information. Nintendo. Retrieved August 16, 2018.
 Nunneley, Stephany. Switch sales stand at over 17M units, Breath of the Wild now bestselling Zelda title. VG247. Archived from the original on April 26, 2018. Retrieved April 27, 2018.
 https:www.nintendo.co.jpirenfinancesoftwareindex.html
 Chalk, Andy April 4, 2017. Watch fully playable Breath of the Wild running at 4K in the Cemu emulator. PC Gamer. Archived from the original on April 24, 2017. Retrieved April 5, 2017.
 Fenlon, Wes March 22, 2017. Wii U emulator devs show incredible Breath of the Wild progress in new video. PC Gamer. Archived from the original on May 5, 2017. Retrieved April 5, 2017.
 Fenlon, Wes March 7, 2017. How the Cemu emulators devs got Zelda: Breath of the Wild running in just a few hours. PC Gamer. Retrieved April 5, 2017.
 2016 Winners. Game Critics Awards. July 2016. Archived from the original on February 25, 2015. Retrieved July 5, 2016.
 Best of E3 2016 Awards. IGN. Ziff Davis. June 17, 2016. Archived from the original on June 22, 2016. Retrieved June 17, 2016.
 Devore, Jordan June 22, 2016. And Destructoids E3 2016 Game of the Show was... Destructoid. Archived from the original on June 22, 2016. Retrieved June 24, 2016.
 Paget, Mat August 19, 2016. Zelda: Breath of the Wild Takes Top Award at Gamescom. GameSpot. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on August 20, 2016. Retrieved August 19, 2016.
 Makuch, Eddie November 16, 2016. All the 2016 Game Awards Nominees. GameSpot. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on January 18, 2017. Retrieved November 18, 2016.
 Makuch, Eddie December 8, 2017. The Game Awards 2017 Winners Headlined By Zelda: Breath Of The Wilds Game Of The Year. GameSpot. Archived from the original on December 9, 2017.
 Makuch, Eddie January 14, 2018. Game Of The Year Nominees Announced for DICE Awards. GameSpot. Archived from the original on January 17, 2018. Retrieved January 17, 2018.
 Pereira, Chris July 5, 2016. Here Are E3 2016s Game Critics Award Winners. GameSpot. Archived from the original on May 20, 2017.
 Osborn, Alex December 1, 2016. The Game Awards 2016 Winners Announced. IGN.
 Rubin, Rebecca; Knapp, JD August 13, 2017. Teen Choice Awards 2017: Riverdale, Fifth Harmony Shut Out Competition. Variety. Archived from the original on August 16, 2017. Retrieved March 25, 2018.
 The Grand Award goes to The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild PDF. Computer Entertainment Suppliers Association. September 21, 2017. p. 1. Archived from the original PDF on September 25, 2017. Retrieved January 15, 2018.
 All the winners from the Radio 1 Teen Awards 2017. BBC. Archived from the original on November 29, 2017. Retrieved January 15, 2018.
 Dwan, Hannah October 27, 2017. Public voting and the nominations for the 2017 Golden Joystick Awards are now up. The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on January 3, 2018. Retrieved January 15, 2018.
 Dwan, Hannah November 18, 2017. The 2017 Golden Joystick Awards winners have been revealed. The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on November 20, 2017. Retrieved January 15, 2018.
 Whitney, Kayla January 25, 2018. Complete list of winners of the New York Game Awards 2018. AXS. Archived from the original on January 27, 2018. Retrieved January 26, 2018.
 Nominee List for 2017. National Academy of Video Game Trade Reviewers. February 9, 2018. Archived from the original on February 15, 2018. Retrieved February 14, 2018.
 Horizon wins 7; Mario GOTY. National Academy of Video Game Trade Reviewers. March 13, 2018. Archived from the original on March 14, 2018. Retrieved March 14, 2018.
 McNeill, Andrew January 31, 2018. Here Are Your 2018 SXSW Gaming Awards Finalists!. SXSW. Archived from the original on February 1, 2018. Retrieved January 31, 2018.
 IGN Studios March 17, 2018. 2018 SXSW Gaming Awards Winners Revealed. IGN. Archived from the original on March 18, 2018. Retrieved March 18, 2018.
 McWhertor, Michael January 5, 2018. Zelda, Horizon lead 2018 Game Developers Choice Award nominees. Polygon. Archived from the original on January 10, 2018. Retrieved January 15, 2018.
 Makuch, Eddie March 21, 2018. Legend Of Zelda: Breath Of The Wild Wins Another Game Of The Year Award. GameSpot. Archived from the original on March 22, 2018. Retrieved March 22, 2018.
 deAlessandri, Marie March 15, 2018. Hellblade: Senuas Sacrifice at forefront of BAFTA Games Awards nominations. The Market for Computer  Video Games. Archived from the original on March 16, 2018. Retrieved March 15, 2018.
 Makedonski, Brett April 12, 2018. BAFTA names What Remains of Edith Finch its best game of 2017. Destructoid. Archived from the original on April 25, 2018. Retrieved April 12, 2018.
 Cohen, Jess June 22, 2018. Teen Choice Awards 2018: Avengers: Infinity War, Black Panther and Riverdale Among Top Nominees. E!. Retrieved June 25, 2018.
 Ramos, DinoRay August 12, 2018. Teen Choice Awards: Riverdale, Infinity War, Black Panther Among Top Honorees  Full Winners List. Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved August 13, 2018.
External links
Official website Edit this at Wikidata
vte
The Legend of Zelda series
vte
Japan Game Award for Game of the Year
vte
Golden Joystick Award for Ultimate Game of the Year
vte
Game Developers Choice Award for Game of the Year
vte
Academy of Interactive Arts  Sciences D.I.C.E. Award for Game of the Year
vte
The Game Awards
Triforce.svgThe Legend of Zelda portalNintendo.svgNintendo portalWPVG icon 2016.svgVideo games portalSamsung Galaxy S5 Vector.svg2010s portal
Categories: 2017 video gamesActionadventure gamesAIAS Game of the Year winnersAmnesia in fictionNintendo Entertainment Planning  Development gamesNintendo Switch eShop gamesNintendo Switch gamesOpen world video gamesPostapocalyptic video gamesSingleplayer video gamesThe Legend of Zelda video gamesVideo games developed in JapanVideo games featuring anthropomorphic charactersVideo games that use Amiibo figurinesVideo games using HavokVideo games with alternate endingsVideo games with celshaded animationVideo games with downloadable contentWii U eShop gamesWii U games

The Legend of Heroes
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
The Legend of Heroes
GenresRoleplaying video game
DevelopersNihon Falcom
PublishersNihon Falcom, Namco Bandai, Xseed Games, NIS America
PlatformsPlayStation Portable, PlayStation Vita, PlayStation 3, PlayStation 4, Microsoft Windows
First releaseDragon Slayer: The Legend of Heroes
December 10, 1989
Latest releaseThe Legend of Heroes: Trails of Cold Steel IV
September 27, 2018
The Legend of Heroes1 is a series of roleplaying video games developed by Nihon Falcom Corporation. First starting as a part of the Dragon Slayer series in the late 1980s, the series evolved into its own decadespanning, interconnected series spanning fourteen entries, encompassing multiple meta series within it as well. The most recent entry, The Legend of Heroes: Trails of Cold Steel IV, released in Japan on September 27, 2018.


Contents
1History
1.1Main games
1.2Spinoff games
2Manga and anime
3References
4External links
History
The first entry of the series was released in 1989 as Dragon Slayer: The Legend of Heroes, and was part of Nihon Falcoms Dragon Slayer line of games. It was released for various computer platforms, as well as consoles such as the Mega Drive, Super Famicom, and the PC Engine. The PC Engine version would be the only version to be released in English, and the only Legend of Heroes title released in North America until 2005. Meanwhile, in Japan, the series continued with Dragon Slayer: The Legend of Heroes II, released in 1992 for a similar selection of platforms.

Subsequent games in the series dropped Dragon Slayer from the title. The Legend of Heroes III, The Legend of Heroes IV, and The Legend of Heroes V comprised the Gagharv trilogy, a set of connected games taking place in the same world.

After the conclusion of the Gagharv trilogy, a new story began with a new trilogy, the Trails in the Sky subseries. The three titles in it, First Chapter, Second Chapter and The 3rd collectively made up the sixth entry in the series.

Falcom switched to a duology for the seventh entry, consisting of The Legend of Heroes VII: Zero no Kiseki in 2010, and The Legend of Heroes VII: Ao no Kiseki in 2011. After that, the company moved on to the Trails of Cold Steel subseries, releasing the first title in 2013,2 the second in 2014, and the third in 2017, with a fourth and final title planned for release in 2018.3

While initially having an inconsistent record with English language releases, by 2017, nine of the thirteen titles had been localized. English releases include the original title by Falcom themselves, the Gagharv trilogy by Namco Bandai, and the Trails in the Sky trilogy and first two titles of the Trails of Cold Steel series by Xseed Games.4

Main games
SubseriesOriginal nameOriginal releaseEnglish nameEnglish releaseNotesPlatforms
Dragon SlayerDragon Slayer: The Legend of Heroes1989Dragon Slayer: The Legend of Heroes1992The first game in The Legend of Heroes series, the sixth subseries of the Dragon Slayer series.NEC PC8801, NEC PC9801, FM7, MSX2, PC Engine, Super Famicom, X68000, Mega Drive, Satellaview, Microsoft Windows, PlayStation, Sega Saturn
Dragon Slayer: The Legend of Heroes II1992Dragon Slayer: The Legend of Heroes IINAThe second game in the Legend of Heroes series, the last to have the Dragon Slayer moniker, and still unreleased in English territories.NEC PC8801, NEC PC9801, Mega Drive, Super Famicom, PC Engine, MSDOS, PlayStation, Sega Saturn
Gagharv trilogyThe Legend of Heroes III: Shiroki Majo1994The Legend of Heroes II: Prophecy of the Moonlight Witch2006The third Legend of Heroes game and first of the Gagharv trilogy. It was renumbered as II for the English release.NEC PC9801, Sega Saturn, PlayStation, Microsoft Windows, PlayStation Portable
The Legend of Heroes IV: Akai Shizuku1996The Legend of Heroes: A Tear of Vermillion2005The fourth game in the Legend of Heroes series, and the second in the Gagharv trilogy. For its English release, all numbering was removed, making it appear to be the first game in the trilogy.NEC PC9801, PlayStation, Microsoft Windows, PlayStation Portable
The Legend of Heroes V: Umi no Oriuta1999The Legend of Heroes III: Song of the Ocean2007The fifth game in the Legend of Heroes series and third and last of the Gagharv trilogy. It was renumbered as III for the English release.Microsoft Windows, PlayStation Portable
Trails in the SkyThe Legend of Heroes VI: Sora no Kiseki2004The Legend of Heroes: Trails in the Sky2011The sixth game in the Legend of Heroes series and the first game of the Trails in the Sky trilogy. All three titles collectively are numbered VI in the Japanese releases. Japanese rereleases grant it the extended title of Sora no Kiseki FC.Microsoft Windows, PlayStation Portable, PlayStation 3, PlayStation Vita
The Legend of Heroes VI: Sora no Kiseki SC2006The Legend of Heroes: Trails in the Sky SC52015The second part of the Sky trilogyMicrosoft Windows, PlayStation Portable, PlayStation 3, PlayStation Vita
The Legend of Heroes VI: Sora no Kiseki the 3rd2007The Legend of Heroes: Trails in the Sky the 3rd52017The final part of the Trails in the Sky trilogyMicrosoft Windows, PlayStation Portable, PlayStation 3, PlayStation Vita
Trails  Crossbell arcThe Legend of Heroes VII: Zero no Kiseki2010Trails to ZeroNAThe first part of The Legend of Heroes VII, also known as the Crossbell arcMicrosoft Windows, PlayStation Portable, PlayStation Vita
The Legend of Heroes VII: Ao no Kiseki62011Trails to AzureNAThe second part of The Legend of Heroes VII, also known as the Crossbell arcMicrosoft Windows, PlayStation Portable, PlayStation Vita
Trails of Cold SteelThe Legend of Heroes: Sen no Kiseki2013Trails of Cold Steel2015The first Trails of Cold Steel gameMicrosoft Windows, PlayStation 3, PlayStation Vita, PlayStation 4
The Legend of Heroes: Sen no Kiseki II2014The Legend of Heroes: Trails of Cold Steel II20167NAMicrosoft Windows, PlayStation 3, PlayStation Vita, PlayStation 4
The Legend of Heroes: Sen no Kiseki III2017The Legend of Heroes: Trails of Cold Steel IIINANAPlayStation 4
The Legend of Heroes: Sen no Kiseki IV2018The Legend of Heroes: Trails of Cold Steel IVNAThe final Trails of Cold Steel gamePlayStation 4
Spinoff games
SubseriesOriginal nameOriginal releaseEnglish nameEnglish releaseNotes
SpinoffYs vs. Sora no Kiseki: Alternative Saga2010NANAA fighting game crossover containing characters from the Trails and Ys series, both Falcom franchises.
Nayuta no Kiseki2012NANAA standalone action RPG set in an entirely different world from the main TrailsKiseki series.
The Legend of Heroes: Akatsuki no Kiseki2016NANAAn online game developed by UserJoy Technology under licence from Falcom, it takes place in Liberl, Crossbell, and Remiferia, and includes some characters from earlier Trails games.
Manga and anime
A Dragon Slayer: The Legend of Heroes original video animation anime was released in 1992, the same year that Dragon Slayer: The Legend of Heroes II was released, loosely based on the story of the first game.8 In 1997, it was dubbed into English by Urban Vision and was released onto VHS in North America. The English dub has yet to be released on DVD.

In 2009, three volumes of a Sora no Kiseki Trails in the Sky manga were published in Japan by Kadokawa Shoten, followed the next year by a sequel Zero no Kiseki  PreStory  Shinpan no Yubiwa, published by ASCII Media Works. Two original video animation anime episodes of Sora no Kiseki were released on October 10, 2011 and January 28, 2012 respectively.9

References
 The Legend of Heroes  Eiy Densetsu
 Spencer 19 February 2013. Meet The Characters In The Legend Of Heroes: Trails In The Flash. Siliconera. Retrieved September 14, 2013.
 http:www.playstationlifestyle.net20171120trailsofcoldsteel4willbethefinalgameintheseries
 Feature: Xseed on the Trails series
 Spencer December 27, 2011. The Legend Of The Heroes: Trails In The Sky Series Soaring To Smartphones In English!. Siliconera. Retrieved September 14, 2013.
 Spencer March 22, 2011. The Legend of Heroes: Trails of Azure, The Sequel To Zero No Kiseki, Hits PSP This Fall. Siliconera. Retrieved September 14, 2013.
 20140408, The Legend of Heroes: Sen no Kiseki II dated in Japan, Gematsu
 Marshall, Marc August 16, 2011. Dragon Slayer: The Legend of Heroes. Akemis Anime World. Retrieved September 14, 2013.
 Legend of Heroes: Trails in the Sky Anime 2 Teaser Posted. Anime News Network. December 12, 2011. Retrieved September 14, 2013.
External links
Falcoms official website in Japanese
vte
The Legend of Heroes series
vte
Dragon Slayer video games
Categories: Roleplaying video gamesVideo game franchisesThe Legend of Heroes seriesVideo game franchises introduced in 1989

Trails in the Sky
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
This article is about the roleplaying game trilogy. For first game in the series, see The Legend of Heroes: Trails in the Sky.
Trails in the Sky
GenresRoleplaying video game
DevelopersFalcom
Publishers
JP: Nihon Falcom
WW: Xseed Games
PlatformsMicrosoft Windows, PlayStation 3, PlayStation Portable, PlayStation Vita
First releaseThe Legend of Heroes: Trails in the Sky
June 24, 2004
Latest releaseThe Legend of Heroes: Trails in the Sky the 3rd
June 28, 2007
The Trails in the Sky series is a metaseries within The Legend of Heroes series of Japanese roleplaying video games. Collectively the sixth entry in the Legend of Heroes series, the series consists of three games, The Legend of Heroes: Trails in the Sky, SC, and The 3rd. The three titles were released between 2004 and 2007 in Japan, while the games massive scope and quantity of text to translate has caused a considerable delay in their English releases. First Chapter was released in 2011, SC in 2015, and The 3rd in 2017.


Contents
1Titles
1.1Trails in the Sky
1.2Trails in the Sky SC
1.3Trails in the Sky the 3rd
2Reception and sales
3See also
4References
Titles
Trails in the Sky
Main article: The Legend of Heroes: Trails in the Sky
The first entry of the game was first released in Japan in 2004 for the PC by Falcom.1 It was shortly afterwards ported over to the PlayStation Portable in 2006.1 Due to its massive size of text, the game was not localized into English until 2011, when translated by Xseed Games.2 Aeria Games, in late 2011, announced they had the rights from Falcom to release the game on mobile phones in English regions, but as of 2015, no further information on this has arisen.2 The game was also given a high definition port as part of Sonys PSP Remaster line of ports to the PlayStation 3 platform in late 2012,3 and an updated rerelease on the PlayStation Vita in 2015.4

Trails in the Sky SC
Main article: The Legend of Heroes: Trails in the Sky SC
The second entry in the series, SC, was initially released in 2006 for the PC and 2007 for the PlayStation Portable in Japan.1 In 2013, Xseed Games announced that they would be working together with Carpe Fulgur in localizing SC, due to all the fan requests after the release of First Chapter.5 Initially announced for a mid2014 release, it was later pushed back to late 2014.6 In December 2014, Carpe Fulgur head Andrew Dice announced that progress in translating the game was slowed by his struggle with depression and suicide.7 Dice handed over his work for Xseed employees to finish up, which, combined with unexpected difficulties during the QA testing of the game, resulted in the games release being delayed into 2015.89 Like First Chapter, SC was also announced for a mobile phone port by Aeria Games that was apparently abandoned,2 and had a 2013 PlayStation 3 HD port10 and a 2015 PlayStation Vita updated rerelease.

Trails in the Sky the 3rd
Main article: The Legend of Heroes: Trails in the Sky the 3rd
The 3rd was first released in 2007 on the PC and 2008 on the PlayStation Portable in Japan.1 As early as 2010, XSeed Games announced Falcom had given them the rights to release The 3rd in English, but due to the massive undertakings of the first two chapters, they did not actually begin work on translating it at that time, nor would they commit to doing so.11 It would take until March 2016 before Xseed announced they had begun work on translating The 3rd, planning to release it in 2017. Like the prior two titles, The 3rd also had an aborted mobile phone port by Aeria Games,2 a HD PlayStation 3 port in 201312 and a 2016 PlayStation Vita updated rerelease. XSeed stated they were unable to release English versions of the PSP, Vita, or PS3 versions of the game due to various issues they did not elaborate upon.

Reception and sales
First Chapter has sold over 500,000 copies as of the end of 2013 across all regions and releases.13 XSeed has stated that the North American release of First Chapter did not initially meet their internal sales goals with its 2011 PlayStation Portable release.14 Despite this, strong enough fan feedback inspired the company to continue working on the series, committing to releasing SC in English.15 Contrary to the modest sales of the PSP release, Xseed would later state that its 2014 PC release was the companys most successful PC launch ever.16

In March 2016, Xseed announced that the English versions of First Chapter and Second Chapter had accumulated sales of over 350,000 sold across all platforms.17

See also
Alternative Saga  a crossover fighting game featuring a number of characters from the Trails in the Sky trilogy
References
 Hardcore Gaming 101: Legend of Heroes: Trails in the Sky.
 RPGFan News  The Legend of Heroes: Trails in the Sky Trilogy Goes Mobile.
 The Legend Of Heroes: Trails In The Sky PSP Vs. PlayStation 3. Siliconera.
 The Legend of Heroes: Trails in the Sky Evolution debut trailer, screenshots  Gematsu. Gematsu.
 The Legend of Heroes: Trails in the Sky sequel coming to PC, PSP. Polygon.
 The Legend of Heroes: Trails in the Sky SC pushed to late 2014. Polygon.
 Depression Led to Trails in the Sky SC Delay, Developer Explains Why  Niche Gamer.
 Addressing Something Important.
 The Legend of Heroes: Trails in the Sky Second Chapter  Localization Blog 2.
 Xseed Looking Into PS3 Version Of Trails in the Sky SC. Siliconera.
 The Legend Of The Heroes: Trails In The Sky Takes Flight In March. Siliconera.
 XSEED to Release Legend of Heroes: Trails in the Sky SC Game on PCPSP in 2014 Updated. Anime News Network.
 People Are Still Buying The Legend Of Heroes: Trails In The Sky. Siliconera.
 Whats Going On With The Legend Of Heroes: Trails In The Sky Second Chapter?  Siliconera. Siliconera.
 Xseed To Publish The Legend of Heroes: Trails in the Sky SC On PC And PSP. Siliconera.
 Legend of Heroes: Trails in the Sky. Facebook.
 Vitale, Adam. XSEED celebrates 5 years of Trails with Cold Steel II screenshots and 3rd Chapter announcement  RPG Site. RPGSite.
vte
The Legend of Heroes series
Dragon Slayer
Dragon Slayer Dragon Slayer: The Legend of Heroes The Legend of Heroes II
Gagharv
Prophecy of the Moonlight Witch A Tear of Vermillion Song of the Ocean
Trails
Trails in the Sky Trails in the Sky SC the 3rd Zero no Kiseki and Ao no Kiseki Trails of Cold Steel Trails of Cold Steel II Trails of Cold Steel III
Spinoffs
Akatsuki no Kiseki Nayuta no Kiseki Ys vs. Sora no Kiseki: Alternative Saga
Related
Nihon Falcom Ys Tokyo Xanadu
Categories: Roleplaying video games by seriesThe Legend of Heroes seriesVideo game franchises introduced in 2004Japanese brands

Zero no Kiseki and Ao no Kiseki
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. October 2011 Learn how and when to remove this template message
Zero no Kiseki
Ao no Kiseki
LoH VII covers.jpg
PSP cover art of Ao left and Zero right
DevelopersNihon Falcom
PublishersNihon Falcom
SeriesThe Legend of Heroes
PlatformsPlayStation Portable
PlayStation Vita
Windows
ReleaseZero no Kiseki PSP
JP: September 30, 2010
Zero no Kiseki PC
JP: June 14, 20131
Zero no Kiseki: Evolution Vita
JP: October 18, 2012
Ao no Kiseki PSP
JP: September 29, 2011
Ao no Kiseki: Evolution Vita
JP: June 12, 2014
GenresRoleplaying game
ModesSingleplayer
Zero no Kiseki2 and Ao no Kiseki3 are two connected roleplaying video games developed by Nihon Falcom as a part of the larger The Legend of Heroes4 series. Together as a duology, they are considered the seventh game in the series, and take place three months after the end of The Legend of Heroes: Trails in the Sky the 3rd and in a different country, Crossbell. The games star Lloyd Bannings, a rookie investigator within the Crossbell police force, joining three years after the death of his brother.

Zero no Kiseki was released in 2010 for PlayStation Portable. In 2011, the game was ported to PC for release in China and Japan. In 2012, it was later ported again for PlayStation Vita as Zero no Kiseki: Evolution, with improved visuals and full voice acting for the main story.5

Ao no Kiseki was released in 2011 for PlayStation Portable, and also ported to PC for release in China. It was also ported again for PlayStation Vita as Ao no Kiseki: Evolution, again with improved visuals and full voice acting for the main story and released in Japan in June 2014.67


Contents
1Localizations
2Reception
3External links
4References
Localizations
No official English localization of the games exists, although a Chinese version was released for Microsoft Windows. Despite that, fan translations of both games are in development.8

Reception
Zero no Kiseki was well received in both Japan and China.citation needed It has won several notable awards, including the PlayStation Award 2010  User Choice Award and the Japan Games Award 2011.9

External links
Zero no Kiseki official website in Japanese
Ao no Kiseki official website in Japanese
References
 The Legend of Heroes Zero no Kiseki to be Released on PC in Japan on 614. 19 April 2013.
 Zero no Kiseki , Trails tofrom Zero
 Ao no Kiseki , Trails tofrom Azure
 Eiy Densetsu 
 Zero no Kiseki: Evolution forPS Vita. Falcom. Retrieved 20120313.
 Legend of Heroes Ao no Kiseki Evolutions Teaser Video Posted.
 A Peek At The Legend Of Heroes: Trails Of Blue Evolutions Anime Opening. 27 March 2014.
 Arshad Khan, Danial. The Legend of Heroes: Trails To Azure Ao no Kiseki fan translation patch released. GearNuke. Retrieved 22 July 2018.
 The Legend of Heroes Zero no Kiseki for PSP Awards. Falcom. Retrieved 20120511.
vte
The Legend of Heroes series
Dragon Slayer
Dragon Slayer Dragon Slayer: The Legend of Heroes The Legend of Heroes II
Gagharv
Prophecy of the Moonlight Witch A Tear of Vermillion Song of the Ocean
Trails
Trails in the Sky Trails in the Sky SC the 3rd Zero no Kiseki and Ao no Kiseki Trails of Cold Steel Trails of Cold Steel II Trails of Cold Steel III
Spinoffs
Akatsuki no Kiseki Nayuta no Kiseki Ys vs. Sora no Kiseki: Alternative Saga
Related
Nihon Falcom Ys Tokyo Xanadu
Categories: 2010 video gamesThe Legend of Heroes seriesPlayStation Portable gamesPlayStation Vita gamesVideo games developed in JapanWindows games2011 video games

The Legend of Heroes: Trails of Cold Steel
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
The Legend of Heroes: Trails of Cold Steel
LoH Sen no Kiseki cover.jpg
Cover art
DevelopersNihon Falcom
Publishers
JP: Nihon Falcom
NA: Xseed Games
EU: NIS America
DirectorsTakayuki Kusano
ProducersToshihiro Kondo
Programmers
Nobuhiro Hioki
Toru Endo
WritersHisayoshi Takeiri
Composers
Hayato Sonoda
Takahiro Unisuga
Saki Momiyama
SeriesThe Legend of Heroes
EnginePhyreEngine
PlatformsPlayStation 3
PlayStation Vita
Microsoft Windows
PlayStation 4
ReleasePlayStation 3, PS Vita
JP: September 26, 2013
NA: December 22, 2015
EU: January 29, 2016
Microsoft Windows
WW: August 2, 2017
PlayStation 4
JP: March 8, 2018
WW: Early 2019
GenresRoleplaying
ModesSingleplayer
The Legend of Heroes: Trails of Cold Steela is a roleplaying video game developed by Nihon Falcom. As a part of the long running The Legend of Heroes series, it was first released for the PlayStation 3 and PlayStation Vita in Japan in September 2013. Xseed Games would later localize and publish the game in English regions in 2015. A port for Microsoft Windows was also released by Xseed in 2017, which included additional English voice acting not seen in the original release. A remastered version for the PlayStation 4 was released in Japan in 2018, and worldwide the following year. A direct sequel, The Legend of Heroes: Trails of Cold Steel II, was released in 2014.


Contents
1Gameplay
2Plot
3Development
4Reception
5Notes
6References
7External links
Gameplay
The basic gameplay is similar to the previous Trails in the Sky titles with some changes. The biggest change to the battle system and also counting as a brand new feature is the Tactical Link System, which allow players to follow up with three different kinds of link attacks, dealing additional damage and providing various other benefits. Tactical Links becomes a more useful asset to the player as the story progress and characters level up their Link Levels with other characters. Another change is the Orbment system. Trails of Cold Steel inherits the Master Quartz system from Ao no Kiseki. The game features 360 degree camera control, fully 3D character models, and voiced conversations between characters during major story moments, all of which were new features to the Legend of Heroes series. Players can also transfer save data between the PlayStation 3 and Vita versions using the crosssave function.

Plot
The game is set in the Erebonian Empire and takes place after the Trails in the Sky series of games and during the same time period as the Crossbell series of games. The games plot is centered around Rean Schwarzer and his fellow Class VII at Thors Military Academy, which is a newly formed class composed of both Erebonian nobility and commoners, being the only one at the entire academy that does not segregate based on social class. The game follows Class VII throughout the school year from March to October, primarily focusing on their field studies that takes them to various cities and areas across Erebonia. The primary purpose of doing so is for the class to witness first hand the reality of the empire, as the power struggle between the nobility, led by four great aristocratic Houses, and the working class reformists led by Chancellor Osborne, which threatens to lead to a civil war.

During their time at the academy, Class VII also are tasked with investigating the Old Schoolhouse, an unused mysterious building on campus that changes its internal layout monthly. At the bottom of the seventh and final floor, they discover an ancient mecha known as Valimar. The story comes to a climax with the assassination of Osborne in the capital by the terrorist known as C, who is revealed to be fellow Class VII student Crow Armbrust. Alongside the assassination, a coup lead by the noble faction leads to Thors being occupied by forces led by Crow piloting his own mecha. Unable to fight it with normal means, Rean calls Valimar in order to fight Crow with it one on one, in which Rean is defeated, leading directly into Trails of Cold Steel II.

Development
icon
This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it. January 2014
Cold Steel uses the PhyreEngine game engine.1 The game was also localized into Chinese and Korean with the assistance of Sony Computer Entertainment Japan Asia.23 The English localization was handled by Xseed Games, who also ported the game to Microsoft Windows in 2017, with the latter including additional voice acting not seen in the original release.456 A remastered version for the PlayStation 4, The Legend of Heroes: Trails of Cold Steel I: Kai Thors Military Academy 1204, was released in Japan in March 2018. It includes many features seen in the PC release, such as support for 4k resolution and a high speed skip combat feature.7 It will be released in North America and Europe in early 2019.8

Reception
Reception
Aggregate score
AggregatorScore
MetacriticPS3 861009
PSV 7710010
PC 8010011
Review scores
PublicationScore
Destructoid71012
Famitsu344013
Game Informer8.51014
Hardcore Gamer4.55 stars15
PlayStation LifeStyle9.51016
RPGamer4.5517
Awards
PublicationAward
PlayStation LifeStyle Awards 2015Editors Choice18
Game Informers Best of 2015Best of 201519
The game received a generally positive reception, according to review aggregator Metacritic.91011 In Japan, Famitsu gave both versions a review score of 3440.13 PlayStation LifeStyle said it is a roleplaying masterpiece with all the right stuff: Xseeds superior localization, which bypasses anime cliches in favor of real depth; an addictive set of lifesim mechanics, from bonding with the lovable cast to cooking a bevy of dishes; and a combat system that rewards customization and cooperation between party members.16 Hardcore Gamer said it is hands down the best JRPG this year and that if this is whats in store for us with future Legend of Heroes titles, its safe to say that the JRPG genre has a bright future ahead of it.15 Kimberley Wallace of Game Informer stated that, with fun combat, interesting twists, and a cool social system, Trails of Cold Steel is one of my favorite recent RPGs.14 Adriaan den Ouden of RPGamer said it is his favorite RPG of 2015.17 Multiplayer.it said it is complex, deep and varied, and sports surprisingly realistic and mature storyline and setting and an unforgettable cast of characters.20 Destructoid said it follows a lot of classic JRPG conventions and doesnt do a whole lot of things that havent been done before but concluded the combat system still holds up, and the characters are charming enough to see the story through until the end.12

During the first week after release, the PlayStation Vita version outsold the PlayStation 3 version, placing second place in the Media Create software sales charts with 81,622 copies sold, compared to the 67,718 copies sold for the PS3 version in fourth place.21 The game resulted in significant profits for Falcom, with 1.9 billion yen in net sales, and 700 million yen in operating profit.22 The game was awarded during the Japan Game Awards 2013 during the Tokyo Game Show by the Computer Entertainment Suppliers Association, as one of eleven titles within the Future Division winners.23

Notes
 The Legend of Heroes: Trails of Cold Steel Japanese:   Hepburn: Eiy Densetsu: Sen no Kiseki
References
 Wong, Alistair. Sonys PhyreEngine Is Now Supported By Nintendo Switch. Siliconera. Retrieved 13 July 2018.
 Sony Is Localizing The Legend Of Heroes: Trails In The Flash Series In Chinese. Siliconera.
 Falcom Bringing Legend Of Heroes: Trails In The Flash To Korea In June. Siliconera.
 Carmichael, Stephanie. New Trails in the Sky RPG coming to PS3 and PS ... GameZone. Retrieved 20130307.
 The Legend of Heroes: Trails of Cold Steel I  II Coming West. Siliconera.
 One PR Studio. XSEED Games Reveals Plans for Trails of Cold Steel PC Version Alongside Launch Date for Trails in the Sky the 3rd. Gamasutra. UBM. Retrieved 7 April 2017.
 Romano, Sal. The Legend of Heroes: Trails of Cold Steel I: Kai for PS4 launches March 8 in Japan. Gematsu. Retrieved 18 January 2018.
 Romano, Sal. The Legend of Heroes: Trails of Cold Steel I and II for PS4 coming west in early 2019. Gematsu. Retrieved 1 October 2018.
 The Legend of Heroes: Trails of Cold Steel for PlayStation 3 Reviews. Metacritic.
 The Legend of Heroes: Trails of Cold Steel for PlayStation Vita Reviews. Metacritic.
 The Legend of Heroes: Trails of Cold Steel for PC Reviews. Metacritic.
 Review: The Legend of Heroes: Trails of Cold Steel. Destructoid. Retrieved 20151222.
 Famitsu Review Scores: Issue 1294. Gematsu. Retrieved 20151208.
 Intriguing Personalities And Tense Battles Make School A Blast  The Legend of Heroes: Trails of Cold Steel  Vita  www.GameInformer.com. www.GameInformer.com.
 Review: The Legend of Heroes: Trails of Cold Steel. Hardcore Gamer. 20151222. Retrieved 20151227.
 Jowy Meli December 22, 2015. The Legend of Heroes: Trails of Cold Steel Review  Back to School Vita  PlayStation LifeStyle. PlayStation LifeStyle. Retrieved December 23, 2015.
 RPGamer  Review  The Legend of Heroes: Trails of Cold Steel.
 Jowy Meli December 22, 2015. The Legend of Heroes: Trails of Cold Steel Review  Back to School Vita  PlayStation LifeStyle. PlayStation LifeStyle. Retrieved December 23, 2015.
 Kimberly Wallace January 12, 2016. 2015 RPG Of The Year Awards. Game Informer. Retrieved January 16, 2016.
 Michele Maria Lamberti 22 January 2016. The Legend of Heroes: Trails of Cold Steel. Multiplayer.it.
 20131002, Monster Hunter 4 tops for third week on Media Create, lifetime sales hit 2.4 million, VG247
 The Legend Of Heroes: Trails In The Flash Brings Falcom Big Profits. Siliconera.
 2013,   2013 Archived 20131007 at WebCite, CESA
External links
Official website
vte
The Legend of Heroes series
Dragon Slayer
Dragon Slayer Dragon Slayer: The Legend of Heroes The Legend of Heroes II
Gagharv
Prophecy of the Moonlight Witch A Tear of Vermillion Song of the Ocean
Trails
Trails in the Sky Trails in the Sky SC the 3rd Zero no Kiseki and Ao no Kiseki Trails of Cold Steel Trails of Cold Steel II Trails of Cold Steel III
Spinoffs
Akatsuki no Kiseki Nayuta no Kiseki Ys vs. Sora no Kiseki: Alternative Saga
Related
Nihon Falcom Ys Tokyo Xanadu
Categories: 2013 video gamesPlayStation Vita gamesPlayStation 3 gamesPlayStation 4 gamesThe Legend of Heroes seriesPolitics in fictionWindows gamesJapanese roleplaying video gamesHigh schoolthemed video gamesRoleplaying video gamesVideo games developed in JapanPhyreEngine games

The Legend of Heroes: Trails of Cold Steel II
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
The Legend of Heroes: Trails of Cold Steel II
Trails of Cold Steel II cover.png
Cover art
DevelopersNihon Falcom
Publishers
JP: Nihon Falcom
NA: Xseed Games
EU: NIS America
WW: Xseed Games Win
DirectorsTakayuki Kusano
ProducersToshihiro Kondo
Composers
Hayato Sonoda
Takahiro Unisuga
SeriesThe Legend of Heroes
EnginePhyreEngine
Platforms
PlayStation 3
PlayStation Vita
Microsoft Windows
PlayStation 4
ReleasePlayStation 3, PS Vita
JP: September 25, 2014
NA: September 6, 2016
EU: November 11, 2016
Windows
WW: February 14, 2018
PlayStation 4
JP: April 26, 2018
WW: Early 2019
GenresRoleplaying
ModesSingleplayer
The Legend of Heroes: Trails of Cold Steel IIa is a roleplaying video game developed by Nihon Falcom. The game is an entry in The Legend of Heroes series, and serves as a direct sequel to Trails of Cold Steel. It was published by the company for PlayStation Vita and PlayStation 3 in Japan in 2014, and was later localized into English and published by Xseed Games in 2016 in North America. A port by Xseed for Microsoft Windows was released in February 2018, while a remastered version for the PlayStation 4 was released in Japan in April 2018, and worldwide the following year. A sequel, Trails of Cold Steel III, was released in 2017.


Contents
1Gameplay
2Plot
3Development
4Reception and sales
5References
6External links
Gameplay
The game plays very similarly to the original Trails of Cold Steel game, playing as a traditional JRPG with turnbased battles.1 The game is not, however, tied to the school schedule structure of the original, with the game now centered around traveling the world rather than attending classes.2 If the player has a completed game save file from completing the prior game, it has an effect on the game of Cold Steel II, with certain events and dialogues playing out different based on choices and relationships built in the prior game.3

Plot
The game is a direct sequel to the original Trails of Cold Steel, picking up one month after ending of that game,4 with Rean having escaped with the Divine Knight, Valimar. He makes it to his hometown of Ymir with the assistance of bracer Toval, where Princess Alfin had also escaped to, but is later kidnapped along with Reans sister Elise by members of the Noble Alliance. Students from Thors Military Academy, including those from Class VII, had been scattered across the country, so Rean attempts to get everyone back together again to put an end to the civil war.

Development
Cold Steel II uses the PhyreEngine game engine, and was released in Japan on September 25, 2014.56 The game was localized into English by Xseed Games.7 Work on translating the game began on February 2015, containing around 1.45 million characters to be translated.7 Translating alone took around a year, with it being about 95 complete in January 2016.7 Xseed also added approximately 11,000 lines of English dialogue for its English release. The game was released in North America on September 6, 2016,3 and in Europe on November 11, 2016.3 A port for Microsoft Windows was released on February 14, 2018, and features various enhancements from the original version, such as support for 4k resolution, various other graphical enchantments, and additional English voice acting.8 A remastered version for the PlayStation 4, The Legend of Heroes: Trails of Cold Steel II: Kai, was released in Japan on April 26, 2018, and in North America and Europe in early 2019.91011

Reception and sales
Reception
Aggregate score
AggregatorScore
MetacriticPS3 9010012
PSV 8010013
PC 8110014
Review scores
PublicationScore
Famitsu314015
Game Informer81016
Hardcore Gamer4.55 stars4
RPGSite91017
RPGFan881
The game received generally favorable reception, according to review aggregator Metacritic.121314 Chris Shrive of Hardcore Gamer strongly praised the game for being a modern JRPG masterpiece with the perfect blend of the classic JRPG formula mixed with contemporary features concluding that the emphasis on story telling and immense cast of memorable characters make the large time commitment worthwhile.4 Kimberly Wallace of Game Informer was similarly positive about the games story and characters, but complained of the games dull dungeons design. Despite the shortcomings, she still felt that the game takes the cast and story in such interesting directions and provides so much to do that its hard to put down...the game makes me care so much about the characters and the world that it becomes easier to look past its flaws.16 Darren McPhail of RPGSite was similarly positive about the game, stating For fans of the previous Legend of Heroes games and especially the first Trails of Cold Steel, picking up Trails of Cold Steel 2 is a nobrainer easy recommendation. While this sequel is unevenly paced and lacks shocking plot twists until the conclusion, the Trails of Cold Steel games are some of the best of the genre and well worth a look for most hardcore RPG fans.17 All three reviewers agreed that, while it was possible to enjoy the games story as a standalone experience, the story was better for people who had played the original Trails of Cold Steel first, due to the games direct ties to one another.41617

In Japan, the game sold 86,283 physical retail copies on the PlayStation Vita and 65,498 retail copies on the PlayStation 3 within its debut release week.18 Within that week, the Vita version placed second among all software sales in Japan, while the PS3 version placed fifth.19 Famitsu gave both versions of the game a review score of 3140.15 The PlayStation 4 version sold 11,345 copies during its first week on sale in Japan, placing it at number ten on the all format sales chart. 20

References
  II Eiy Densetsu: Sen no Kiseki Ts in Japanese
 Hagues, Alana 6 September 2016. The Legend of Heroes: Trails of Cold Steel II Review. RPGFan. Archived from the original on 24 September 2016. Retrieved 24 September 2016.
http:www.rpgamer.comgameslohlohsnk2reviewslohsnk2strev1.html
 http:www.siliconera.com20160825europegetslegendheroestrailscoldsteeliinovember112016
 Review: The Legend of Heroes: Trails of Cold Steel II. Hardcore Gamer. 20160907. Retrieved 20160907.
 Wong, Alistair. Sonys PhyreEngine Is Now Supported By Nintendo Switch. Siliconera. Retrieved 13 July 2018.
 http:gematsu.com201404legendheroessenkisekiiidatedjapan
 http:www.siliconera.com20160111legendheroestrailscoldsteeliistranslation95complete
 Vitale, Adam. Trails of Cold Steel II launches for PC on February 14. RPG Site. Retrieved 27 January 2018.
 Romano, Sal. New The Legend of Heroes: Trails of Cold Steel title, Trails of Cold Steel I and II coming to PS4. Gematsu. Retrieved 4 December 2017.
 Sato. Trails of Cold Steel II: Kai Releases In Japan On April 26, 2018 For PS4. Siliconera. Retrieved 27 January 2018.
 Romano, Sal. The Legend of Heroes: Trails of Cold Steel I and II for PS4 coming west in early 2019. Gematsu. Retrieved 1 October 2018.
 The Legend of Heroes: Trails of Cold Steel II for PlayStation 3 Reviews. Metacritic. Retrieved 2 August 2018.
 The Legend of Heroes: Trails of Cold Steel II for PlayStation Vita Reviews. Metacritic. Retrieved 2 August 2018.
 The Legend of Heroes: Trails of Cold Steel II for PC Reviews. Metacritic. Retrieved 2 August 2018.
 Famitsu Review Scores: Issue 1346. Gematsu. Retrieved 20141119.
 Continuing To Impress And Surprise  The Legend of Heroes: Trails of Cold Steel II  Vita  www.GameInformer.com. www.GameInformer.com.
 RPGSite  Review  The Legend of Heroes: Trails of Cold Steel II.
 Trails in the Flash II Sold Nearly The Same Amount As Its Predecessor. Siliconera. October 3, 2014. Retrieved October 3, 2014.
 20141001, Media Create Sales: 92214  92814 Archived 20150131 at the Wayback Machine., Gematsu
 Romano, Sal May 23, 2018. Media Create Sales: 51418  52018. Gematsu. Retrieved May 25, 2018.
External links
Official website
vte
The Legend of Heroes series
Dragon Slayer
Dragon Slayer Dragon Slayer: The Legend of Heroes The Legend of Heroes II
Gagharv
Prophecy of the Moonlight Witch A Tear of Vermillion Song of the Ocean
Trails
Trails in the Sky Trails in the Sky SC the 3rd Zero no Kiseki and Ao no Kiseki Trails of Cold Steel Trails of Cold Steel II Trails of Cold Steel III
Spinoffs
Akatsuki no Kiseki Nayuta no Kiseki Ys vs. Sora no Kiseki: Alternative Saga
Related
Nihon Falcom Ys Tokyo Xanadu
Categories: 2014 video gamesPlayStation Vita gamesPlayStation 3 gamesPlayStation 4 gamesRoleplaying video gamesThe Legend of Heroes seriesPolitics in fictionVideo games developed in JapanWindows gamesPhyreEngine games

The Legend of Heroes: Trails of Cold Steel III
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
The Legend of Heroes: Trails of Cold Steel III
The Legend of Heroes Trails of Cold Steel III video game logo 2017.jpg
DevelopersNihon Falcom
PublishersNihon Falcom
SeriesThe Legend of Heroes
PlatformsPlayStation 4
Release
JP: September 28, 2017
GenresRoleplaying
ModesSingleplayer
The Legend of Heroes: Trails of Cold Steel III  III Eiy Densetsu: Sen no Kiseki Sur is a roleplaying video game by developer Nihon Falcom. It is the thirteenth separate entry in Falcoms longrunning The Legend of Heroes, and a direct sequel to the prior two entries, Trails of Cold Steel and Trails of Cold Steel II. The game was released on the PlayStation 4 video game console on September 28, 2017. No plans for an English region release have been announced, though the series shift to PS4 has been described by Falcom as due to the platforms large worldwide userbase. A fourth and final entry in the subseries, Trails of Cold Steel IV: The End of Saga, has been announced for a late 2018 release on PS4 as well.1


Contents
1Gameplay
2Story
3Development
4Reception
4.1Sales
5References
6External links
Gameplay
The game plays as a traditional JRPG with turnbased battles, similar to Trails of Cold Steel and Trails of Cold Steel II. An emphasis on speeding up battles is being made as well, including making transitions into battle scenes more seamless, and being able to map out more battle commands to specific buttons rather than various menus, though the battles will still be primarily menubased.2

Story
The game is a direct sequel to the prior two Trails of Cold Steel games, picking up one and a half years after the events of Trails of Cold Steel II.3 The story will be centered around main character Rean Schwarzer, now a military professor, as well as his students, and the rest of his military school friends from the prior two entries,4 notably exploring subjects such as the mysterious origins of Reans birth, and what others have been up to since the events of the prior games. The game will also feature appearances from Tita and Agate, characters from Trails in the Sky, a separate meta series within The Legend of Heroes series, as well as Tio and Randy, characters from Trails to Zero.3

Development
Intentions to create a third entry in the Trails of Cold Steel meta series were announced as early as December 2015, at Nihon Falcoms 2015 shareholders meeting.5 Initial planning began in early 2016, though the development team was initially divided on which platforms the game should release on.6 On one hand, the PlayStation Vita was preferred, due to its larger userbase in Japan, and prior entries in the series being released there, but the team also wanted to consider using the much more powerful PlayStation 4, which could greatly help with the games scope.7 Fullscale development on the title began around mid2016.6 The game was officially revealed as a PlayStation 4 exclusive in December 2016, at Falcoms 2016 shareholders meeting.84 Unlike the prior two entries, no Vita or PlayStation 3 versions will be developed.9 The game was initially scheduled for a release window of Q3 2017 in Japan,10 later narrowed down to September 28, 2017.11 While no official plans have been announced for an English language release, some websites reported that it was mentioned in the 2016 shareholders meeting that a deciding factor in developing the game for the PS4 was to help ensure higher international sales for the game,912 with the PS4 having a much larger userbase in most countries outside of Japan as of 2016.13 This premise was reiterated in July 2017, with Falcom president Toshiro Kondo stating:

Foreign sales have reached a point with both the Trails series and Ys where we cant ignore them from a development angle anymore. Ys: Memories of Celceta, for example, sold more outside of Japan than it did inside of Japan. Because Vita has kind of been on the decline for a while outside of Japan, and because the PS4 userbase is pretty established elsewhere, we have begun shifting toward PS4 development.13

Reception
Prerelease

After the positive reception of the first two Trails of Cold Steel entries, journalist were generally enthusiastic for the prospect of a third entry, though many lamented the lack of a Vita version of the game.891410

Sales
Trails of Cold Steel III debuted as the best selling game in its week of release. According to Media Create, the game sold 87,261 units.15 This was a significant drop from the 151,781 units Cold Steel II had sold in its first week.16 Media Create attributed this decline to the lack of a PlayStation Vita version.17 Despite this, Dengekis sales reports still estimated that approximately 80 of the games physical stock was sold at launch,18 and Falcom announced that the title had the highest digital game sales in the series as well.19

References
 https:www.animenewsnetwork.comnews20171220falcomannouncesthelegendofheroestrailsofcoldsteelivrpg.125529
 Falcom Working On Seamless Battles And Divine Knight Fights For Trails of Cold Steel III. Siliconera.com. 20 December 2016. Retrieved 23 September 2017.
 The Legend of Heroes: Trails of Cold Steel III set a year and a half after Trails of Cold Steel II  Gematsu. Gematsu.com. 20 December 2016. Retrieved 23 September 2017.
 The Legend of Heroes: Trails of Cold Steel III Releases In Japan In Fall 2017 Exclusively For PS4  Siliconera. Siliconera.com. 19 December 2016. Retrieved 23 September 2017.
 The Legend of Heroes: Trails of Cold Steel III Production Announced. Siliconera.com. 15 December 2015. Retrieved 23 September 2017.
 Williams, Mike 26 July 2016. Trails of Cold Steel III Under Consideration as PS4 Exclusive. Usgamer.net. Retrieved 23 September 2017.
 Falcom CEO thinking about making The Legend of Heroes: Trails of Cold Steel III a PS4exclusive  Gematsu. Gematsu.com. 26 July 2016. Retrieved 23 September 2017.
 Williams, Mike 20 December 2016. Trails of Cold Steel 3 Is PS4 Exclusive, Coming Fall 2017 in Japan. Usgamer.net. Retrieved 23 September 2017.
 Trails of Cold Steel III will be exclusive to PS4. Destructoid.com. Retrieved 23 September 2017.
 Legends of Heroes: Trails of Cold Steel 3 is PS4 Exclusive. Playstationlifestyle.net. 21 December 2016. Retrieved 23 September 2017.
 The Legend of Heroes: Trails of Cold Steel III launches September 28 in Japan Update  Gematsu. Gematsu. 20170509. Retrieved 20170509.
 The Legend of Heroes Sen no Kiseki III Exclusively for PlayStation 4 in Fall 2017. Esterior.net. 20 December 2016. Retrieved 23 September 2017.
 Bailey, Kat 6 July 2017. Why Trails in the Sky Developer Falcom is Embracing the PS4, and Their Thoughts on the Switch. Usgamer.net. Retrieved 23 September 2017.
 Legend of Heroes: Trails of Cold Steel III Announced  Hardcore Gamer. Hardcoregamer.com. Retrieved 23 September 2017.
  III87000FIFA18680006. 4Gamer. October 4, 2017. Retrieved October 8, 2017.
  II1510007. 4Gamer. October 1, 2014. Retrieved October 8, 2017.
 Nelva, Giuseppe. Lack of PS Vita Version Hurt The Legend of Heroes: Trails of Cold Steel III According to Media Create. DualShockers. Retrieved October 8, 2017.
 http:www.siliconera.com20171005legendheroestrailscoldsteeliiisold80initialshipment
 http:www.siliconera.com20171006legendheroestrailscoldsteeliiifardigitalsalesseries
External links
Official website
vte
The Legend of Heroes series
Dragon Slayer
Dragon Slayer Dragon Slayer: The Legend of Heroes The Legend of Heroes II
Gagharv
Prophecy of the Moonlight Witch A Tear of Vermillion Song of the Ocean
Trails
Trails in the Sky Trails in the Sky SC the 3rd Zero no Kiseki and Ao no Kiseki Trails of Cold Steel Trails of Cold Steel II Trails of Cold Steel III
Spinoffs
Akatsuki no Kiseki Nayuta no Kiseki Ys vs. Sora no Kiseki: Alternative Saga
Related
Nihon Falcom Ys Tokyo Xanadu
Categories: 2017 video gamesPlayStation 4 gamesPlayStation 4only gamesRoleplaying video gamesThe Legend of Heroes seriesVideo games developed in Japan

Gravity Rush 2
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
Gravity Rush 2
Gravity Rush 2.jpg
DevelopersSIE Japan Studio Team Gravitya
PublishersSony Interactive Entertainment
DirectorsKeiichiro Toyama
ProducersMakato Isomine
DesignersJunya Okura
ProgrammersAtsushi Nakamura
Toshitake Tsuchikura
ArtistsShunsuke Saito
Takeshi Oga
WritersKeiichiro Toyama
Naoko Sato
ComposersKohei Tanaka
PlatformsPlayStation 4
Release
AU: January 18, 2017
EU: January 18, 2017
JP: January 19, 2017
NA: January 20, 2017
UK: January 20, 2017
GenresActionadventure
ModesSingleplayer
Gravity Rush 2, known in Japan as Gravity Daze 2,b is an actionadventure video game. The sequel to Gravity Rush, it is developed by SIE Japan Studios Team Gravity division, and published by Sony Interactive Entertainment for the PlayStation 4.2 Directed by Keiichiro Toyama, the core mechanic of the game is the players ability to manipulate gravity, allowing unique movements and navigation.


Contents
1Gameplay
2Plot
3Development
4Reception
4.1Accolades
5References
Gameplay
The gravitycontrolling mechanics introduced in Gravity Rush are expanded in Gravity Rush 2. Players are able to choose among three gravity styles: the original style from the first game, Lunar and Jupiter. Lunar will be light and increase Kats speed and her ability to jump higher. Jupiter will make Kat feel heavy, giving her attacks more impact.3 Players can change between gravity styles using the touch pad.2

Director Keiichiro Toyama stresses immersion with Gravity Rush 2. Toyama says the key to this is expanding the universe and making Kat and her surroundings feel more alive. The new city in the game, for example, is more lively and colorful, and Kat will be able to chat with the citys inhabitants, throw gang signs, and people will react organically. Environments will be destructible.3

The Nevi return in Gravity Rush 2, along with other enemies, such as human soldiers, some of whom operate combat mechs. Fellow Gravity Shifter Raven, who appeared as an antagonist for most of the first game, will be an AIcontrolled ally who can fight with Kat during certain battles.3

As Gravity Rush 2 has three times the amount of missions than its predecessor, the game is between 2040 hours long. The game map is 2.5 times larger than the one from the original.3

Plot
The game takes place directly after the events of Gravity Rush, and a prequel anime called Gravity Rush: The Animation  Overture .4 In the city of Hekseville, reconstruction is progressing after the incident caused by the former mayor, Dnelica. After a gravitational disturbance is reported in the floating district of Neu Hiraleon, Kat travels there with her gravity shifting partner Raven, and Syd, a police officer, to investigate. Following a fight with mysterious androids, the three are sucked into a gravitational vortex and transported to a different world, along with the entire district.

The events of the game begin when Kat and Syd arrive in the impoverished Banga Village. They befriend a girl named Cecie, who also arrived in mysterious circumstances, and work to mine Gravity Ore, traveling into Rift Planes to harvest it to sell to unscrupulous trader Vogo Sun. After preventing his attempt to shortchange the village, they travel to the floating city of Jirga Para Lhao for supplies. There, they realize that the citys rich are oppressing its poor through military force, and the use of Raven, who has been brainwashed to believe she is called Night Gale. Kat battles Raven, freeing her and sparking an uprising against the Council, the citys usurping rulers. The insurrection succeeds, restoring the people of Banga to their rightful rule of Jirga Para Lhao.

However, Neu Hiraleon appears, having become a giant Nevi after landing in a Rift Plane, and kills the Council. Kat and Raven defeat it and rescue Cecie, who it was using as a power source. In doing so, Kat is again sucked back into Hekseville. There, she meets Kali Angel, a mysterious Shifter who replaced her as the citys hero, and Dr. Brahman, a brilliant scientist who designed a citywide, robotic, Nevi defense system. Brahman becomes mayor despite an attack by rebels, but it is soon revealed that the rebels are right, and Brahman is a madman who plans to use the crystalinduced powers of his kidnapped daughters, Kali and Cecie, also known as Durga Angel, to stop time itself. Kat and Raven, who arrived back in Hekseville along with Cecie, defeat Brahman and his daughters, killing both him and Kali, and saving the city, with the help of the city of Jirga Para Lhao, which came through a tear in space.

In the games final chapter, Kat encounters a glowing girl, who tells her that the dark ocean under the city will destroy Hekseville and the world. On the advice of Alias, Kat and Raven travel to the top of the World Pillar, finding the frozen city of Eto. King Cai informs her that she is the former queen, and cloisters her in the castle due to an illness, but Kat realizes she was brainwashed and that he is holding Raven prisoner. After fighting off Cais Nevi minions, Kat is rescued by Creator Bit, and forced to remember her past. She realizes that Syd is Alias, and one of her former retainers, and that they were betrayed by her other retainer, Xicero, for wanting to save the people below from the dark ocean. However, the Creators decided to save them, as they were swayed by Kats altruism.

King Cai releases the glowing girl from a crystal, revealing her to be Elektricitie, the personification of electrical energy, and expressing an intent to hasten the worlds demise. The people of Hekseville are unable to stop her, but are able to stall until Kat arrives and defeats her, albeit through the sacrifice of the other Creators. King Cai is enraged, and merges with his Guardian, Wolp, into a giant monster that is the manifestation of the black hole below the city. This dark being offers Kat a deal to make her survive the end and eventual rebirth of the world, but she chooses to defeat him with the help of the populace, and seal the black hole by sacrificing herself. A year later, Kat makes a return, much to Ravens shock, while Cai mysteriously escapes from police custody.

Development
Work on Gravity Rush 2 started when the development of Gravity Rush was finished. It was announced on September 20, 2013 at the Tokyo Game Show and was originally known as Team Gravity Project. During their Tokyo Game Show 2015 presentation, Sony unveiled the game as Gravity Rush 2.5 Originally scheduled to be released on December 2, 2016, the game was delayed to January 2017 by Sony in order to ensure that the game would not compete with other tripleA titles set to be released during the Christmas period.6

On December 3, 2016, it was announced that the free DLC that Sony were offering to make up for the delay will be Ravens Choice, allowing players to play as the secondary main character Raven, Another Story The Ark of Time  Ravens Choice will see Raven battling to save the Lost Children trapped inside the Ark at the end of the first Gravity Rush.7 On March 23, 2017 Free Raven DLC was released.8

Kohei Tanaka, who worked on the music for Gravity Rush, returned to compose the music for Gravity Rush 2.9 An anime, titled Gravity Rush: The Animation  Overture , was released on December 26, 2016. Made by Studio Khara, it serves as a bridge to fill the narrative gap between Gravity Rush and Gravity Rush 2.64

On November 11, 2016, Gravity Rush 2 went gold.10 Sony announced 2Bs outfit from Nier: Automata to be released in North America for free on May 5, 2017.1112

Gravity Rush 2s servers shut down on July 19, 2018.1314 It was previously announced that the shutdown would occur on January. However, it was extended, due to fans reaction of the announcement.1516

Reception
Reception
Aggregate score
AggregatorScore
Metacritic8010017
Review scores
PublicationScore
Destructoid9.51018
EGM91019
Game Informer7.51020
Game Revolution45 stars21
GameSpot91022
GamesRadar35 stars23
IGN8.41024
Polygon7.51025
USGamer91026
Gravity Rush 2 received generally favorable reviews, according to video game review aggregator Metacritic.17

Peter Brown of GameSpot praised how the game built improved upon its predecessor by calling it more than just a simple followup, Gravity Rush 2 exceeds expectations. Brown noted the variety and scope of the world and felt that the story was much improved by being more consistent and engaging.22 Jaz Rignall of USGamer was also positive regarding the story, considering the character development, light and fun approach and stylized delivery to be the Gravity Rush 2s stronger element, even favorably comparing them to Studio Ghibli productions.26 Reviewing for Polygon, Whitney Reynolds noted the protagonist Kats fun characterization and enthusiasm as reasons to play through the optional side quests. Reynolds also praised the overall larger cast of female characters.25 Chris Carter of Destructoid considered the visuals to be enhanced by having been developed for the PS4 first, unlike the first Gravity Rush while still retaining well received elements from before, including the hand drawn art and comic bookstyled story transitions, calling the overall looks gorgeous.18

Miranda Sanchez of IGN was positive to the gravity altering gameplay and the new additions to Kats abilities, progression and their use in the games many activities and combat, the latter of which made more interesting by offering creativity options with Kats movements. However Sanchez did critique certain instances of unfortunately long missions in smaller spaces that made the otherwise cooperative camera a pain.24 David Roberts of GamesRadar also praised the gravitybased movement throughout the openworld environment yet was critical of the camera controls, particularity in small spaces calling it illequipped to keep up. In addition Roberts was negative towards to ground based missions that contrasted with other sections of the game.23

As of February 15, 2017, Gravity Rush 2 has sold 102,630 copies in Japan.27

Accolades
Polygon ranked the game 19th on their list of the 50 best games of 2017.28 The game was nominated for Best PS4 Game in Destructoids Game of the Year Awards 2017;29 and for Best PlayStation 4 Game, Best ActionAdventure Game, and Best Original Music in IGNs Best of 2017 Awards.303132

YearAwardCategoryResultRef
2017The Independent Game Developers Association AwardsVisual DesignNominated33
2018National Academy of Video Game Trade Reviewers AwardsCamera Direction in a Game EngineNominated3435
Control Design, 3DNominated
Costume DesignNominated
Direction in a Game CinemaNominated
Game EngineeringNominated
References
Notes
 Additional work by Media.Vision and Racjin.
 Gravity Daze 2 GRAVITY DAZE 2 Guraviti DeizuJryokuteki Memai kanketsuhen: Js e no Kikan no Hate, Kanojo no Uchi Uch ni Shren Shita Sentaku, lit. Gravity Daze 2Gravitational Dizziness Final Chapter: The End of the Repatriation of the Upper Stratum, Choices That Converged Her Inner Space1
Footnotes
 http:www.cgmagonline.com20170208whygravityrush2isunpopularinwest
 Dutka, Ben January 4, 2016. Gravity Rush 2 Preview. Retrieved February 20, 2016.
 GrothAndersen, Magnus November 2, 2015. Gravity Rush 2. Retrieved February 27, 2016.
 Gach, Ethan. The Anime Prequel To Gravity Rush 2 Is Now Available In Full. Kotaku. Retrieved 20170426.
 VanDervoort, Oliver November 16, 2015. Gravity Rush 2 Wiki  Everything you need to know about the game. Retrieved February 27, 2016.
 Hussain, Tamoor October 6, 2016. Gravity Rush 2 Delayed, But Sony Offering Free DLC to Make Up for It. GameSpot. Retrieved October 6, 2016.
 Gravity Rush 2 Ravens Choice DLC will be a free addon.
 You can grab Gravity Rush 2s free Raven DLC now. Destructoid. Retrieved 20170426.
 Romano, Sal December 9, 2015. 11 minutes of Gravity Rush 2 gameplay, details. Retrieved February 27, 2016.
 Dunning, Jason November 11, 2016. Gravity Rush 2 Has Gone Gold. Retrieved November 28, 2016.
 Gravity Rush 2 Gets Its NieR: Automata 2B Costume For Kat On April 27 In Japan, May 5 In The West. Siliconera. 20170426. Retrieved 20170426.
 PlayStation on Twitter. Twitter. Retrieved 20170426.
 Sato 12 January 2018. Gravity Rush 2s Online Service Will Last A Little Longer With A Delay To July 19, 2018  Siliconera. Siliconera. Retrieved 12 January 2018.
 Barker, Sammy 20180719. Gravity Rush 2s Servers Unceremoniously Shut Down After 18 Months. PushSquare. Retrieved 20180724.
 Frank, Allegra 20180112. Gravity Rush 2 server shutdown postponed following fan campaign. Polygon. Retrieved 20180113.
 McCarthy, Caty 20180113. Gravity Rush 2s Online Servers May Have Been Temporarily Saved by Fans. USgamer. Retrieved 20180113.
 Gravity Rush 2 for PlayStation 4 Reviews. Metacritic. Retrieved January 10, 2017.
 Carter, Chris January 10, 2017. Review: Gravity Rush 2. Destructoid. Retrieved January 10, 2017.
 Patterson, Mollie January 10, 2017. Gravity Rush 2 review. Electronic Gaming Monthly. Retrieved 10 January 2017.
 Vazquez, Suriel January 10, 2017. Stuck In The Clouds  Gravity Rush 2  PlayStation 4. Game Informer. Retrieved January 10, 2017.
 Kozanitis, James January 10, 2017. Gravity Rush 2 Review. Game Revolution. Retrieved January 10, 2017.
 Brown, Peter January 10, 2017. Gravity Rush 2 Review. GameSpot. Retrieved January 10, 2017.
 Roberts, David January 10, 2017. Gravity Rush 2 review: An original, inventive world held back by rote mission design. GamesRadar. Retrieved January 10, 2017.
 Sanchez, Miranda January 10, 2017. Gravity Rush 2 Review. IGN. Retrieved January 10, 2017.
 Renyolds, Whitney January 10, 2017. Gravity Rush 2 review. Polygon. Retrieved January 10, 2017.
 Rignall, Jaz January 10, 2017. Gravity Rush 2 PS4 Review: Cats Whiskers. USGamer. Retrieved January 10, 2017.
 Sato February 15, 2017. This Week In Sales: A Week For Everyone With Dragon Quest Monsters, Nioh, And Neptunia. Siliconera. Retrieved February 18, 2017.
 Polygon staff December 18, 2017. The 50 best games of 2017. Polygon. Retrieved February 12, 2018.
 Devore, Jordan December 11, 2017. Nominees for Destructoids Best PS4 Game of 2017. Destructoid. Retrieved February 12, 2018.
 Best of 2017 Awards: Best PlayStation 4 Game. IGN. December 20, 2017. Retrieved February 12, 2018.
 Best of 2017 Awards: Best ActionAdventure Game. IGN. December 20, 2017. Retrieved February 12, 2018.
 Best of 2017 Awards: Best Original Music. IGN. December 20, 2017. Retrieved February 12, 2018.
 2017 Winners. The Independent Game Developers Association. November 2, 2017. Retrieved September 6, 2018.
 Nominee List for 2017. National Academy of Video Game Trade Reviewers. February 9, 2018. Retrieved February 15, 2018.
 Horizon wins 7; Mario GOTY. National Academy of Video Game Trade Reviewers. March 13, 2018. Retrieved March 14, 2018.
vte
Gravity Rush series
vte
Studio khara
Categories: 2017 video gamesActionadventure gamesAction roleplaying video gamesAmnesia in fictionOpen world video gamesPlayStation 4 gamesPlayStation 4only gamesPlayStation 4 Pro enhanced gamesRoleplaying video gamesSingleplayer video gamesSony Interactive Entertainment gamesVideo games developed in JapanVideo games featuring female protagonistsVideo games with celshaded animation

Gravity Rush
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
Gravity Rush
GravityRushPSVitaCover.png
Cover for the North American Vita release
DevelopersSCE Japan Studio Team Gravitya
PublishersSony Computer Entertainment
DirectorsKeiichiro Toyama
ProducersMakato Isomine
DesignersJunya Okura
ProgrammersHirotaka Yokokawa
ArtistsYoshiaki Yamaguchi
Shunsuke Saito
Takeshi Oga
WritersKeiichiro Toyama
Naoko Sato
ComposersKohei Tanaka
PlatformsPlayStation Vita
PlayStation 4
ReleasePlayStation Vita
JP: February 9, 2012
NA: June 12, 2012
AU: June 14, 2012
EU: June 15, 2012
PlayStation 4
JP: December 10, 2015
NA: February 2, 2016
AU: February 3, 2016
EU: February 5, 2016
GenresActionadventure
ModesSingleplayer
Gravity Rush, known in Japan as Gravity Daze,b is an actionadventure video game developed by SCE Japan Studios Team Gravity division and published worldwide in 2012 by Sony Computer Entertainment for the PlayStation Vita. A high definition remaster developed by Bluepoint Games for the PlayStation 4 was released in 2015 in Japan and 2016 in the West. In Gravity Rush, players control Kat, an amnesiac with the power to manipulate how gravity affects her, and uses her powers to help the people of Hekseville against the mysterious Nevi, ultimately helping its people against human threats and uncovering the mystery behind her past. Gameplay has Kat exploring the open world of Hekseville, completing missions for townsfolk and defeating Nevi. Navigation and combat heavily involve Kats gravityaltering abilities.

Beginning development for PlayStation 3 in 2008 under the title Gravit before moving to the Vita, Gravity Rush was conceived by director Keiichiro Toyama prior to his work on Silent Hill and the Siren series. The team overcame technical challenges due to the gameplay and chosen hardware. The world, story and artistic style drew from Japanese and Western comics including the work of French artist Jean Giraud. The music was composed by Kohei Tanaka, who worked on the project from an early stage. Upon release, the game received mixed to positive reviews; praised went to the artstyle and Kats portrayal, but aspects of gameplay and control issues were criticized. The game went on to sell 200,000 copies worldwide. The remaster also released to positive reviews, focusing on its successful upgrade. A sequel, Gravity Rush 2, was released in 2017.


Contents
1Gameplay
2Synopsis
3Development
3.1Design
3.2Scenario and art
3.3Music
4Release
4.1Gravity Rush Remastered
5Reception
5.1Sales
6Sequel
7References
8External links
Gameplay
Player character and three barrels floating in the air. At the center there is a circular sight. In the upper left hand corner there is a green bar. In the upper right hand corner there is a score indicator and a timer.
Gravity Rush protagonist Kat using her powers of gravity manipulation, aiming several objects at a target during a time trial.
Gravity Rush is an actionadventure video game in which players take the role of Kat, a young woman who can manipulate how gravity affects her, allowing her to walk on walls and fly through the air.2 Kat navigates the games open world of Hekseville both on foot using roads and walkways, and using her powers; activating Kats abilities, the player then tilts the PlayStation Vita, aiming Kat and allowing her to fall in that direction. Kat can also use her abilities to walk on vertical surfaces or areas such as ceilings and the underside of structures. Kats gravitybased abilities are tied to an energy meter which decreases when her powers are active. When fully depleated, Kats powers deactivate until the meter recharges.34

Combat takes place either on the ground or with Kat using her powers against enemies. When on the ground, Kat attacks by kicking enemies in their weak spots. When using her powers, Kat can rotate and aim at those weak spots. Increasing Kats distance before attacking using her powers increases the amount of damage.24 Some abilities used in combat, such as the ability to locate and lock onto weak points, are tied to a cooldown timer which must replenish before being used again.35

During navigation, Kat can find three types of pickups; blue cubes which restore her energy and allow prolonged use of her gravity powers; green crystals which restore health; and pink crystals which act as the games currency.3 These gems are rewarded by completing quests given by nonplayer characters NPC, and can be used to buy and upgrade new abilities for Kat, or attributes such as health and energy.45 Quests include escorting NPCs, fighting packs of enemies, and making deliveries. During these and other types of quest, Kat can use a particular ability to pick up objects and carry them with her as she navigates Hekseville. Some areas also require Kat to navigate platforming sections, which grant access to new abilities tied to the story.235

Synopsis
The game opens with an amnesiac Kat waking up in Hekseville, a floating city around a structure called the World Pillar. Kat is accompanied by a mysterious cat named Dusty; in saving a boy from being swept up in a gravity storm, she discovers that Dusty has the ability to manipulate how gravity affects her, enabling her to help people fight monsters spawned from the storms called Nevi. After saving Syd, a police officer who becomes her friend, she learns that those with her powers are dubbed Shifters by Heksevilles people. As she begins helping the citys denizens, she is confronted by fellow Shifter Raven, who sees her as an enemy. Kat becomes involved in operations to catch Alias, a criminal linked to the Nevi  she eventually defeats him, sending him into a garbage crusher where he is killed. Alongside this, Kat helps restore sections of Hekseville swallowed by spatial rifts with the aid of Gade, a man who claims to be a Creator. Kat restores all of Hekseville despite further interference from Raven, who apparently dies during a fight with Kat. Her exploits earn her the name Gravity Queen. Following Alias defeat and the return of the final missing part of Hekseville, Kat is offered a place in the citys military if she will follow orders of its commander, Yuri Gerneaux, but she refuses.

Kat then meets a woman who dropped the last letter she received from her deceased boyfriend over the edge of Hekseville. To find it, she travels inside the World Pillar, a gigantic column that supports Hekseville and stretches from the sky to below the clouds. On her way down, her Shifter powers fade, and she is confronted by Raven, but the two are attacked by Nushi, a giant Nevi. Kat wakes to find herself captive in Boutoume, a city beneath the Pillar, where a group of children are living under the protection of their leader Zaza. Kat and Raven help protect the children from Nushi, but they learn that the dark sea beneath Boutoume is slowly rising. One of the children, Cyanea, later confronts Kat  in a trance, while possessed by a being called a Dream Guardian, she reveals herself to be the Creator of the world through her dreams, and sends Kat into a dream where she learns that she is from a higher part of the World Pillar where she held a powerful position and suffered due to a great burden.

Having regained some of her forgotten power, Kat activates a ship called the Ark, which can transport everyone back to Hekseville. As the Ark launches after Kat beats back Nushi, Kat learns that Raven was originally one of the children trapped in Boutoume, and that she had been told by Heksevilles city alderman Dnelica not to retrieve them. On the way up, Kat succumbs to exhaustion and is separated from the Ark. Making her way back up the World Pillar, she ends up receiving the letter she was sent for from the boyfriends ghost. Returning to Hekseville, she finds that a whole year has passed due to the temporal distortions experienced in the lower parts of the World Pillarunder constant Nevi attacks, Hekseville has come under martial law and Dnelica has become its mayor. Kat is forced to fight Nushi one last time, before it is destroyed by an enhanced military operative called Yunica. Syd has become part of the military after its absorption of the civilian police forces. Offered a second chance to join the military efforts against the Nevi, Kat again refuses. She is then asked by a scientist to help gather data about the Nevi, but it is a ruse to find out more about her Shifter powers.

After suffering from a nightmare about Alias, Kat wakes to find that Cyanea has reappeared, although Raven and the rest of the children are still missing. Attending a rally with Gade and Syd where Dnelica unveils the Nevidestroying weapon Sea Anemone, Kat responds to a Nevi attack and is captured by Yunica together with Dusty. As Syd attempts to free her, the Sea Anemone  which was constructed with a Nevi core as part of Dnelicas plan to control both Hekseville and the Nevi  goes berserk and begins attacking the city. Cyaneas Dream Guardian self decides to intervene and frees Dusty, who subsequently frees Kat. Kat manages to damage the Sea Anemone, first with help from Yunica, who uses her mechanical weapons to damage its armor; then from Cyanea and Gade as they combine their powers with Kats to summon the Ark as a missile. Dnelica activates the Sea Anemones selfdestruct function, heedless of the collateral damage, but Kat, Raven and Yunica are able to stop it before that happens, and fling it at Neu Hiraleon, where it explodes. The people hail Kat as their savior, while calling for the wounded Dnelicas resignation for his part of the fiasco. The children within the Ark remain in stasis, with Cyanea saying they will wake to help restore light to the world; Dnelica learns Kats original identity through a red crystal in his possession; and Gerneaux remembers a prophecy about a harbinger of catastrophe falling from the world above, referring to Kats appearance.

Development

Keiichiro Toyama first conceived Gravity Rush prior to working on Silent Hill and the Siren series; he acted as director and contributed to the scenario.
The initial concept for Gravity Rush came to Keiichiro Toyama during the beginning of his video game career when he joined Konami. His initial idea was a vague image of people floating in space, with later concepts and ideas forming over time. Due to his work first at Konami as director for the original Silent Hill, Toyama was labelled as a horror game director, leading him to work for Sony Computer Entertainment on the Siren series as part of the firstparty SCE Japan Studio development team Project Siren. As Siren: Blood Curse was nearing completion, and noting the combination of increasing costs and decreasing revenue for horror games, Toyama decided to prove his ability to design outside the horror genre and turn his concept for Gravity Rush into a video game.67 Toyama first pitched Gravity Rush to Sony in April 2008 as a gravity action game for the PlayStation 3 PS3 under the title Gravit. It was a title aimed at hardcore gamers which would be expanded with downloadable content DLC.8 The main staff were made up of veterans of Toyamas Siren series.9

Full production began following the completion of Siren: Blood Curse in mid2008.10 When creating the project, the team combined the concepts of gravity manipulation and a protagonist flying through the air, with the gameplay being inspired by Toyamas experience with the Sixaxis wireless controller prior to the PS3s retail release.1011 When creating the first prototype, the team used character models from Siren: Blood Curse to test the gravitybased physics.12 Development on the PS3 version ran between 2008 and 2009, with a concept video to help the team finalize the art style and gameplay being put together using Autodesk Maya during 2008.1213 The team were also implementing the Sixaxis controller as part of the gameplay.9 During 2009, Toyama received information about the Vitathen in development and known internally as Next Gen Portableso he could test its capabilities. Impressed by the Vitas gyroscope system and its potential application to the gravitybased action of Gravity Rush, and further encouraged by Sony president Shuhei Yoshida, Toyama decided to shift development to the Vita.121415

When the project was being designed for PS3, the team felt confident they could match their concept video as the console had been out for two years prior to Gravity Rush beginning development, the team saw and encountered little difficulty working with the established hardware. The main issues faced by the team were the size of the game world, the amount of content, and how to program the game. When development shifted to the Vita, which was still in development and had no set hardware specifications, the staff size dropped and the team had to reassess their priorities as they needed to help demonstrate the platforms unique features with the game.15 Initially the Vita was expected to have similar capacities with the PS3, allowing the team to carry over their previous development experience. When they realized that the Vita had far less power than the PS3, they needed to reassess the entire project, leading to all their previous work being scrapped. Difficulties with the Vitas stillfluctuating hardware specifications during the first year of development forced Project Siren to develop the gaming on Microsoft Windows personal computers, a rarity for firstparty Sony developers. By January 2011, the game was running on the Vita hardware and the team focused on polishing the graphics and gameplay.10 The pressure to create a firstparty Vita title in time for the platforms year of release put a large burden on the development team. A moment Toyama remembered later was when the Vita was publicly revealed, which also saw Gravity Rush announced as part of the platforms launch lineup; due to the game suffering from unresolved frame rate problems, Toyama felt anxious about completing the game.11

Design
Toyamas greatest inspiration on the gameplay of Gravity Rush was Crackdown, influencing the upgrade system and open world.6 During early stages, the team contemplating giving players safe areas within which the gravity manipulation would play out similar to a puzzle, but test player feedback led to the gravitybased navigation being applied to an open world. The team also discarded the concept of fall damage.16 Toyama had the team watch the movie Hancock as a reference for Kats sluggish movement through the air.9 The lack of a targeting reticle or automated aiming was included partially to focus player attention on the Vitas gyroscope functions and to prevent the game from being too easy. The touchscreen controls were intended to play a larger role in combat, but Toyama found the result more difficult to control and so restricted it to dodging. The map design, which used a simple 2D design, was meant to ease navigation for players exploring the city from above using Kats powers.17 The most difficult gameplay move for the team was the Gravity Slide.18

The decision to have an open world town caused the gravity manipulation mechanic to become the basis of nearly all gameplay elements. During early testing, the team creating small test areas such as enclosed rooms and tunnels, first determining what cues to give players about which was up and down when manipulating gravity. To this end, they included flying vehicles, distinct architectural styles with clear tops and bottoms, and other elements such as the movements of people and how Kats clothing behaves.17 A major issue with the gameplay was ensuring the environments had proper collision detection; while most games had multiple inaccessible areas which lacked collision detection, the gravity mechanic meant that the player could navigate a larger number of surfaces in the game, necessitating increased focus on ensuring collision detection for all surfaces worked as intended. During this period, the team used Havok software when testing both collision and the behavior of destructible elements.19 Kats moveset during her navigation and combat used a combination of handanimated and physicsbased movements.11

The game was designed to run consistently at 30 frames per second, with lower resolution graphics being used to allow both a consistent frame rate and quicker loading for environments. The team worked with Sony to create several graphical tricks, such as false reflections from character eyes during realtime cutscenes and transparent elements in the scenery, to keep the frame rate high while not compromising the games graphical quality. The final game featured 300,000 polygons per frame, sitting between the standard polygon counts of the PlayStation 2 and the PS3; including shadow elements and other aspects, the polygon count expanded to the point that the team feared they could not maintain a steady frame rate. In response, they devises a type of polygon culling where graphics hidden by other nearer objects had their polygon count greatly decreased, with separate layers of culling for both the ingame camera perspective and its peripheral area, which was further enhanced using the games ambient occlusion. A version of this system was also applied to the lighting engine, controlling where light and shadow effects needed to be during movement through the environment. Due to the games graphics and its platform limitations, a special shader system was used for character model lighting so as to preserve both realistic lighting and the cel shaded graphics. Another unique shader was used for the games pickups, giving them a translucent quality. The result enabled graphical quality comparable to the PS3, as the culling and shader technology worked around the Vitas hardware limitations.2021

Scenario and art
The overall style and cel shaded graphics of Gravity Rush was profoundly influenced by FrancoBelgian bandes dessine comics, with Toyama citing bandes dessine artists Jean Giraud and Enki Bilal as direct inspiration. The choice of bandes dessine allowed a combination of realism and fantastic elements that Yamaguchi felt was unique to the style.622 Another influence on the world design was the movie The Fifth Element.23 The concept of Gravity Rush stemmed from a scene from The Incal, a graphic novel series illustrated by Giraud; several scenes showed characters falling through space, scenes which Toyama later emulated within Gravity Rush.24 The worlds culture was based on modern day cities, while the buildings and streets of Hekseville were based on towns and cities from Northern and Eastern Europe, combining old buildings with modern transport. Specific influences were the cities of Copenhagen and Amsterdam.923 Its design began with the World Pillar being at its center, then the rest of the city grew around it around the concept of a fixed time period for the whole city to allow for the creation of interesting locations.23 The games spoken dialogue used a constructed language which sounded similar to French; Toyama created the language based on Girauds bande dessine work and his observations that Japanese dubs of French movies felt natural.14

The scenario was written by Naoko Sato.25 The basic story and the script for some scenes was written by Toyama.14 The central story concept of two rival characters with similar superpowers was taken from comic books of the 1970s, with Toyama comparing the scenario to Hancock, The Bionic Woman and Majokko Meguchan.926 The shift to Vita and the consideration of the games Western market drastically impacted the games story and presentation. To appeal to as broad a market as possible, the narrative and presentation were modeled after both Japanese anime and Western comic book narratives, in addition to the bandes dessines influences. Despite being a direct shift from the dark tone of the Siren series, Toyama used the similar premise of a protagonist getting involved in a crisis in a strange town.27 The worlds fictional language was seen as another potential problem when appealing to the Western market.25 A central theme in the story was Kats growth as a character through her hardships, acting as a metaphor and medium for commentary on the modern class system and examining a stagnating world system.14 The Japanese title Gravity Daze was designed to both communicate the games gravitybased premise and give an impression of strangeness. The long subtitle was meant to be impressive, with Toyama using the subtitle for Dr. Strangelove for inspiration.10 Due to production deadlines, the team had to cut much of the intended later narrative.28

Toyama based the main protagonist on characters from American comic books such as Batman.29 The choice of a female protagonist proved contentions, as research at the time showed games with female leads selling less in the West.25 Kats personality was based by Toyama on his own view of the world and ways of talking with people.18 Kats young age also factored into this; while young protagonists was a norm in Japan partially due to the culture of purity surrounding them, in the West having a young protagonist was contentious for multiple reasons. After consulting with Western Sony staff, it was decided to keep the female Kat as the main protagonist, with Sato designing Kat so she would appeal to a wide audience. To make Kat more appealing, Sato chose simple and wellknown story tropes for Kats storylinesuch as her amnesia, solving a central mystery, and helping Heksevilles peoplein addition to allowing players to hear Kats inner thoughts during conversations and story cutscenes. Sato also greatly decreased the amount of violence from the first draft while preserving the meaning of story scenes. A cited example of this was a scene where Sid came upon Kat bathingwhile in the game Sid slipped and fell, in the original draft Kat would have kicked him, a style of physical humor common in Japanese anime but seen as unpopular overseas.25 The Nevi were designed to combine geometric shapes with the feeling of life.18 The minor characters of Kats cat and Ravens crow companions were intended to evoke history through their appearance and lack of expressive features.26

The art director for Gravity Rush was Yoshiaki Yamaguchi, who had previously worked on the Siren series.3031 Yamaguchi created the initial drafts of the games planned female protagonist before Kat was created.31 When creating the town of Hekseville, Yamaguchi drew directly from bande dessine comics, using line drawing to exaggerate building outlines and choosing unusual environmental colors.30 The core concept for the games environments was Living Background, a concept which would present the games bande dessine influences within a moving background. The effect was creating using multiple shaders and different environmental effect layers. The process was draining for the relatively small team assigned with creating the graphics.1932 The main characters were designed by Shunsuke Saito.28 Kats design reflected the wish to appeal to Western players; her proportions, face and hair were more realistic than what many expected of Japanese character designs.25 The key words for Kats design were ninja, strong woman and unknown nationality.33 Kat went through multiple redrafts, with her final design meant to have no exact origin and hold an exotic quality similar to popular female game heroine Lara Croft.6 Enemy designs were by Takeshi Oga, while NPC designs being handled by Yukiko Itano.28 The games concept and cover art was also created by Oga. When creating the cover art, Oga worked to convey the setting and gameplay elements of Gravity Rush.2834

Music
The music was composed by Kohei Tanaka, noted for his work both in anime and on video games such as the Sakura Wars series and Resonance of Fate.3536 Arrangements were done by Tanaka, Keiji Inai and Yasuhisa Murase.37 Tanaka was brought on board the project as Toyama felt Tanaka was the only one who could recall the orchestral melodies of animations from the 1970s.14 Similar to his work on the Sakura Wars series, Tanaka began working on the soundtrack from early on in development, resulting in Tanakas work influencing the development of gameplay.36 Tanaka used a mixture of acoustic orchestra, electric guitar and bass, drums, and saxophone; in addition, he used a Synthesound board to create more experimental sounds. Rather than sticking to a single musical genre, Tanaka mixed genres to emulate the world and gameplay of Gravity Rush.35 While some songs were completed and approved quickly, others required several retakes and Tanaka sometimes had to defend his work from outside criticism. A particular concern for Tanaka was that the looping environmental tracks would not become tiresome for players.38

The ending theme Douse Shinundakara was composed by Tanaka and arranged by Murase. The lyricswhich used the games constructed languagewere written by Toyama, while the theme was sung by Masako Toda.37 Toyama wrote the lyrics based on a portion of the games script which saw Kat transported through an introspective vision about her past. At the time of writing, production was not going smoothly and Toyama was feeling frustrated and more conscious of death in the wake of a severe earthquake in Japan in 2011. Realizing that death was inevitable and that people should enjoy the moment, Toyama wrote the lyrics to imply this message.14 Toyama was worried during the recording process due to the lyrics being fictional, but Tanaka advised Toda to sing the song as if she were humming a tune in a bar.1437

An official album release, Gravity Daze Official Soundtrack, was published by Team Entertainment on March 21, 2012.39 The album has received positive reviews from music critics.4041

Release
Gravity Rush was first announced under its Japanese title Gravity Daze as part of the unveiling of the Vita, being announced alongside titles such as Uncharted: Golden Abyss and LittleBigPlanet PS Vita.42 The game released in Japan on February 9, 2012.43 The game also released in Mainland Asia the following day.44 Following the games release, updates were issued which addressed graphical and behavioral problems.45 Between March and April 2012, Gravity Rush received three downloadable content DLC packs; each includes a new outfit for Kat, two side mission, and two challenge missions.464748

Sony continued to promote the title in the coming months, including launching a commercial featuring Japanese idol and actress Akari Hayami; the commercial featured Hayami performing the same gravity manipulation as Kat. Hayami filmed the commercial after finishing school one day, although she still had to change into a new school costume despite wearing a uniform. She enjoyed the filming despite having to be suspended from wires for several sequences; after shooting was completed, the staff gave her a Vita and copy of the game.49

In the West, the game was originally announced under its Japanese title,42 then later referred to under the title Gravity when it was shown off at the 2011 Electronic Entertainment Expo.5051 Its official English title Gravity Rush was revealed in August of that year.52 A game demo was released for the West in May 2012.53 The game released in North America on June 12,54 in Europe on June 15,55 and in Australia on June 14.56 One of the Japanese DLC packs was released as a preorder bonus, with the other two being postrelease paid DLC.57

Gravity Rush Remastered
A high definition remaster for PlayStation 4 titled Gravity Rush Remastered was announced in September 2015; in addition to generally upgrading the title for the new console, it included all DLC released for the Vita version.58 The remaster was developed by Bluepoint Games, a studio which had earned a reputation for highquality remasters such as The Ico  Shadow of the Colossus Collection.59 One of the main reasons for making the remaster was Toyamas wish to bring Gravity Rush to a wider audience.60 In addition to increasing the frame rate, the team were able to implement upgrades to the lighting, blur effects, draw distance and graphics engine.5960 The character models were upgraded to the type used in the games indevelopment sequel.59 The game released on December 10, 2015 in Japan; on February 9, 2016 in North America; and on February 10 in Europe.61 In Australia, the game released in February 3.62 Originally announced as a digital exclusive in North America, a physical edition was released exclusively through Amazon.com.6163

Reception
Reception
Review scores
PublicationScore
PS4PS Vita
Destructoid810666.5104
EdgeNA81067
EGM910699.51068
FamitsuNA384071
Game InformerNA81072
GameSpot710736.5102
GamesRadar4.55 stars754.55 stars74
IGN7.510767.5105
OPM UKNA91077
Aggregate score
Metacritic80100658310064
Famitsu called the setting outstanding;71 while Destructoids Jim Sterling said that while Kat was an adorable protagonist, the story became nonsensical by the second half.4 Edge Magazine said the story provided an engaging blend of eccentric nonsense, providing engaging scenarios for Kat while also praising her for breaking away from the physical superhero norms.67 Mollie L. Patterson Electronic Gaming Monthly praised Kat as a protagonist,68 while Christian Donlan of Eurogamer praised the writing, narrative, and the light tone adopted to tell the story.70 GamesRadars Lucas Sullivan likewise enjoyed Kat as a protagonist and praised the cast,74 while Dan Ryckert of Game Informer felt that the story quickly lost focus and left the player wanting.72 GameSpots Carolyn Petit felt that the game left too many mysteries unanswered.2 Greg Miller of IGN greatly enjoyed Kats characterization and the opening segments of the story, but shared Petits criticisms of the ending.5 Official PlayStation Magazines Louise Blain called Kat a perfect, charmingly reluctant heroine, but said that trying to describe the story would be like trying to explain five seasons of Fringe in one sentence.77

Speaking about the gameplay, Famitsu enjoyed the sensation of navigating the city, and praised the sense of freedom despite noting control issues.71 Sterling enjoyed exploring the city, but found the combat cumbersome and mission objectives repetitive.4 Edge likewise enjoyed exploring the city and positively compared the wall walking segments to climbing in Crackdown, and despite finding aspects of general gameplay and combat weak did not feel this brought down the experience too much.67 Patterson was positive overall, saying that while there were some elements that seemed underdeveloped, the overall experience was highly enjoyable and left her wanting more.68 Donlan called combat simple but satisfying and praised both the exploration and controls,70 while Ryckert enjoyed general exploration and combat while finding most side activities basic.72 Petit enjoyed exploring the city, but found combat tedious and felt that the games pacing was bogged down by uninteresting side activities.2 Sullivan found aspects of the control scheme took some time to master, but generally enjoyed the gameplay.74 Miller praised the gravitybased gameplay, but called some later missions frustrating.5 Blain praised the controls and found the gravitybased gameplay generally entertaining.77

Both Famitsu and Edge praised the visuals;6771 Edge positively called them a Studio GhiblimeetsCharles Dickens stylistic blend.67 Sullivan likewise positively compared both the music and the visuals to the work of Studio Ghibli. His one warning was that it was not for people who suffered from motion sickness.74 Patterson praised the comic book artstyle, technical polish and the music, calling the latter beautifully produced, fitting the fantastical setting68 Both Donlan and Ryckert shared praise for the general aesthetic and structure of the game world.7072 Petit praised the cutscenes comic panel style and called the overall visuals beautiful.2 Miller praised the soundtrack and visuals, but found the draw distance was too short.5 Blain positively noted the structure of the games city environments, and praised the cutscenes.77

Reviewing the Asian English release of Remastered, Josh Tolentino of Destructoid praised the technical upgrade despite it still being clearly a Vita game, but criticized the lack of new content.66 Patterson, again reviewing for Electronic Gaming Monthly, echoed her praise for the original game and said that the upgrade to PS4 and the technical upgrades had made the experience even better for her.69 IGNs Marty Silva said that the games art style and smooth framerate allowed it to hold its own despite its age, but did not enjoy the motion control options. He called it the best way of experiencing Gravity Rush.76 Justin Towell of GamesRadar also gave the remastering praise, noting its graphics and improved sense of scale, but criticizing persistent camera difficulties experienced in the original.75 Oli Welsh, writing for Eurogamer, praised Remastered as standing among Bluepoint Studios better efforts, praising its visual and technical upgrades despite the simplistic design dragging down the experience.78 GameSpots Peter Brown likewise praised the upgrade to the graphics.73

Sales
Upon its debut in Japan, Gravity Rush reached second place on game charts, selling over 43,400 units and coming in behind the PlayStation Portable PSP title Genso Suikoden: Tsumugareshi Hyakunen no Toki. While a strong start for the game, Vita sales had dropped from the previous week and were behind both the PSP and the Nintendo 3DS.79 By March, the game had sold over 100,000 units in the region, including both digital downloads and physical shipments. While no exact figures were given, sales in Mainland Asia were also said to be positive.80 In the United Kingdom, Gravity Rush reached ninth place in the UK Individual Platforms Top 10 in its week of release.81 By August 2012, Gravity Rush had sold 200,000 units worldwide.82

Gravity Rush Remastered reached tenth place in the charts with just over 25,000 units sold. While low compared to other debuts that week, its status as a remaster with few additions factored into this figure.83 A different sales estimate placed the game in thirteenth place with a little under 20,000 units.84 In the United Kingdom, the game failed to reach the top 20 bestselling titles of that week despite a lower price tag than other new releases, coming in at thirtyfourth place.85

Sequel
Main article: Gravity Rush 2
In a July 2012 interview with Japanese gaming magazine Famitsu game director Keichiro Toyama expressed interest in developing a sequel to Gravity Rush.86 After receiving the Tokyo Game Show 2012 Game of the Year award, and receiving congratulations from fans Toyama said, Ill do my best on the sequel.87 The sequel, titled Gravity Rush 2, was announced on Sonys TGS 2015 press conference and was released in the United States on January 20, 2017 for the PlayStation 4.88

After the release Kat was added to the Everybodys Golf 6 roster as downloadable content.89 Kat, Raven, Alias, and Yunica were added as a costume pack for LittleBigPlanet 2, LittleBigPlanet PS Vita, and LittleBigPlanet Karting.90 Kat is also a playable character in PlayStation AllStars Battle Royale, available as downloadable content.91

References
Notes
 Remastered developed by Bluepoint Games.
 Guraviti DeizuJryokuteki Memai: Js e no Kikan ni Oite, Kanojo no NaiUch ni Shjita Setsud Japanese: :, lit. Gravitational Dizziness: The Perturbation of Her Inner Space Caused by the Repatriation of the Upper Stratum1
Citations
 PS Vita Gravity Rush Gravitational Dizziness: The Perturbation of her Inner Space caused by the Repatriation of the Upper Stratum. AmiAmi. Archived from the original on July 21, 2015. Retrieved January 5, 2018.
 Petit, Carolyn June 13, 2012. Gravity Rush Review. GameSpot. Archived from the original on September 10, 2013. Retrieved January 20, 2017.
 Gravity Rush Instruction manual North American ed.. Sony Computer Entertainment. June 12, 2012.
 Jim, Sterling May 24, 2012. Review: Gravity Rush. Destructoid. Archived from the original on August 27, 2016. Retrieved May 24, 2012.
 Miller, Greg May 24, 2012. Gravity Rush Review. IGN. Archived from the original on August 13, 2016. Retrieved January 20, 2017.
 Rubenstein, Jeff March 14, 2012. Gravity Rushs Creators Reveal The Games Origins. PlayStation Blog. Archived from the original on May 25, 2016. Retrieved January 15, 2018.
 Yip, Spencer December 16, 2011. Gravity Rush Was Ten Years In The Making. Siliconera. Archived from the original on January 9, 2012. Retrieved January 15, 2018.
 Romano, Sal February 9, 2012. Gravity Rush started out on PlayStation 3. Gematsu. Archived from the original on February 10, 2012. Retrieved January 15, 2018.
 AAVGGRAVITY DAZE in Japanese. Dengeki Online. June 17, 2011. Archived from the original on August 15, 2013. Retrieved January 15, 2018.
 GRAVITY DAZE in Japanese. 4Gamer.net. August 30, 2011. Archived from the original on February 8, 2017. Retrieved January 15, 2018.
 GRAVITY DAZE in Japanese. 4Gamer.net. March 3, 2012. Archived from the original on June 28, 2015. Retrieved January 15, 2018.
 GRAVITY DAZE in Japanese. 4Gamer.net. April 3, 2012. Archived from the original on July 24, 2017. Retrieved January 15, 2018.
 Romano, Sal April 14, 2012. Interview: Gravity Rushs Keiichiro Toyama. Gematsu. Archived from the original on April 16, 2012. Retrieved January 15, 2018.
 Leo, Jon June 15, 2012. Defying physics in Gravity Rush. GameSpot. Archived from the original on January 7, 2018. Retrieved January 15, 2018.
 GRAVITY DAZEPS3PS VitaPS Vita  in Japanese. Famitsu. April 2, 2012. Archived from the original on April 3, 2012. Retrieved January 15, 2018.
 The Gameplay of Gravity Rush. PlayStation. June 1, 2012. Archived from the original on January 15, 2018. Retrieved January 15, 2018.
 GRAVITY DAZECEDEC 2012 in Japanese. Famitsu. August 21, 2012. Archived from the original on October 5, 2012. Retrieved January 15, 2018.
 Your Gravity Rush Questions Answered. PlayStation. July 16, 2012. Archived from the original on January 15, 2018. Retrieved January 15, 2018.
 GTMF 2012GRAVITY DAZEPS Vita in Japanese. 4Gamer.net. July 6, 2012. Archived from the original on July 8, 2012. Retrieved January 15, 2018.
 3DGRAVITY DAZE in Japanese. Game Watch Impress. February 12, 2013. Archived from the original on July 24, 2016. Retrieved January 15, 2018.
 CEDEC 2012GRAVITY DAZESCE30fpsVita in Japanese. 4Gamer.net. August 22, 2012. Archived from the original on August 25, 2012. Retrieved January 15, 2018.
 Clements, Ryan March 16, 2012. Gravity Rush: On Cats and Comics. IGN. Archived from the original on January 1, 2013. Retrieved January 15, 2018.
 The World of Gravity Rush. PlayStation. May 22, 2012. Archived from the original on January 15, 2018. Retrieved January 15, 2018.
 Hansen, Stevan September 14, 2016. Meet the man who made Silent Hill and Gravity Rush. Destructoid. Archived from the original on September 17, 2016. Retrieved January 15, 2018.
 CEDEC 2012Too JapaneseGRAVITY DAZE in Japanese. 4Gamer.net. August 21, 2012. Archived from the original on May 13, 2015. Retrieved January 15, 2018.
 The Characters of Gravity Rush. PlayStation. May 2, 2012. Archived from the original on January 15, 2018. Retrieved January 15, 2018.
 Gifford, Kevin October 30, 2013. Silent Hill creator discusses how he joined the game biz and why AAA horror is difficult to fund. Polygon. Archived from the original on November 8, 2017. Retrieved January 15, 2018.
 GRAVITY DAZE     Gravity Daze Series Artbook  Douya Rejavi Saaeju in Japanese. Kadokawa Shoten. March 20, 2017. ISBN 4048925237.
 Boxer, Steve January 17, 2012. Gravity Rush: Sony talks us through Vitas mental adventure. Computer and Video Games. Archived from the original on January 22, 2012. Retrieved January 15, 2018.
 Yamaguchi, Yoshiaki May 2, 2012. The Art Of Gravity Rush On PS Vita. PlayStation Blog. Archived from the original on September 30, 2015. Retrieved January 15, 2018.
   in Japanese. PlayStation Blog. August 8, 2016. Archived from the original on April 29, 2017. Retrieved January 15, 2018.
 CEDEC 2012IPGRAVITY DAZELiving BackGround in Japanese. 4Gamer.net. August 22, 2012. Archived from the original on August 25, 2012. Retrieved January 15, 2018.
 GRAVITY DAZEGDC 2012 in Japanese. Famitsu. March 10, 2012. Archived from the original on March 12, 2012. Retrieved January 17, 2018.
 GRAVITY DAZE1 in Japanese. 4Gamer.net. May 30, 2012. Archived from the original on May 10, 2013. Retrieved January 15, 2018.
 Leo, Jon July 16, 2012. Sound Byte: Gravity Rush Music Showcase. GameSpot. Archived from the original on January 7, 2018. Retrieved January 15, 2018.
 GRAVITY DAZE 2 D in Japanese. Famitsu. February 26, 2017. Archived from the original on February 26, 2017. Retrieved January 15, 2018.
 Kohei Tanaka. Gravity Daze Original Soundtrack liner notes. in Japanese Team Entertainment. March 21, 2012. KDSD005412 Retrieved on January 15, 2018.
  in Japanese. 4Gamer.net. March 31, 2002. p. 7. Archived from the original on April 1, 2016. Retrieved January 15, 2018.
 GRAVITY DAZE  in Japanese. Team Entertainment. Archived from the original on September 17, 2017. Retrieved January 15, 2018.
 Gann, Patrick June 20, 2012. Dizzying Heights: Gravity Rush OST Review. Original Sound Version. Archived from the original on June 23, 2012. Retrieved January 15, 2018.
 Friedman, Marc August 1, 2012. Gravity Rush Original Soundtrack. Video Game Music Online. Archived from the original on January 15, 2018. Retrieved January 15, 2018.
 First NGP games announced. GameSpot. January 27, 2011. Archived from the original on October 5, 2016. Retrieved January 24, 2018.
 GRAVITY DAZE in Japanese. Famitsu. February 2, 2012. Archived from the original on February 14, 2012. Retrieved January 24, 2018.
 Leo, Jon February 6, 2012. Asia Shippin Out Feb 511: Gravity Daze, Darkness II, Amalur. GameSpot. Archived from the original on October 16, 2013. Retrieved January 24, 2018.
 Gravity Daze   in Japanese. PlayStation. Archived from the original on October 10, 2012. Retrieved January 24, 2018.
 Gantayat, Anoop February 29, 2012. Three Weeks of Gravity Rush Download Content Start on March 22. Andriasang.com. Archived from the original on September 26, 2015. Retrieved January 24, 2018.
 Gantayat, Anoop March 26, 2012. Gravity Rush Maid Download Content Coming in April. Andriasang.com. Archived from the original on March 29, 2012. Retrieved January 24, 2018.
 Gantayat, Anoop April 2, 2012. First Look: Gravity Rushs Maid Costume. Andriasang.com. Archived from the original on April 6, 2012. Retrieved January 24, 2018.
 Gantayat, Anoop May 10, 2012. Sony Readying New Gravity Rush Commercial Campaign. Andriasang.com. Archived from the original on December 25, 2012. Retrieved January 24, 2018.
 Gallegos, Anthony June 6, 2011. E3 2011: Defying Gravity on PlayStation Vita. IGN. Archived from the original on August 29, 2011. Retrieved January 24, 2018.
 Bradform, Matt June 9, 2011. E3 2011: Screens and details drop for PS Vitas Gravity. GamesRadar. Archived from the original on January 23, 2018. Retrieved January 24, 2018.
 Elliot, Patrick August 20, 2011. Gravity Daze Now Gravity Rush, New Screenshots and Trailer. Push Square. Archived from the original on July 10, 2015. Retrieved January 24, 2018.
 Dutton, Fred April 16, 2012. Gravity Rush demo release date announced. Eurogamer. Archived from the original on September 30, 2015. Retrieved January 24, 2018.
 Cheng, Wilson February 29, 2012. Gravity Rush Floats to PS Vita on June 12. PlayStation Blog. Archived from the original on September 17, 2017. Retrieved February 29, 2012.
 Maschke, Rebecca February 29, 2012. Gravity Rush Coming To PS Vita As Both Download And Game Card On 13th June. PlayStation Blog. Archived from the original on March 3, 2012. Retrieved February 29, 2012.
 Spudic, Joshua June 14, 2012. Gravity Rush Now Available In Australia. Capsule Computers. Archived from the original on October 30, 2012. Retrieved January 24, 2018.
 Toyama, Keiichiro June 12, 2012. Gravity Rush Launches Today on PS Vita  Get the Inside Scoop on DLC. PlayStation Blog. Archived from the original on June 16, 2012. Retrieved January 24, 2018.
 Cowan, Danny September 15, 2015. Gravity Rush Remake and Sequel Announced for PlayStation 4. Digital Trends. Archived from the original on February 4, 2016. Retrieved January 26, 2018.
 PS4 GRAVITY DAZE in Japanese. PlayStation Blog. September 20, 2015. Archived from the original on August 4, 2016. Retrieved January 26, 2018.
 Gravity Rush Remastered  Keiichiro Toyama interview  PS4 YouTube Video. PlayStation. January 28, 2016. Archived from the original on December 30, 2016. Retrieved January 26, 2018.
 Ike, Sato October 28, 2015. Gravity Rush Remastered Will Only Get A Digital Version In North America. Siliconera. Archived from the original on March 28, 2017. Retrieved January 26, 2018.
 Hamilton, Kirk January 27, 2016. Gravity Rush Soars To PS4, Sticks The Landing, Gathers Some Gems. Kotaku Australia. Archived from the original on January 28, 2016. Retrieved January 26, 2018.
 Romano, Sal November 14, 2015. Gravity Rush Remastered North American retail release confirmed Update. Gematsu. Archived from the original on September 17, 2017. Retrieved January 26, 2018.
 Gravity Rush for PlayStation Vita. Metacritic. Archived from the original on January 5, 2017. Retrieved June 13, 2012.
 Gravity Rush Remastered for PlayStation 4. Metacritic. Archived from the original on May 10, 2016. Retrieved January 20, 2017.
 Tolentino, Josh January 15, 2016. Review: Gravity Rush Remastered. Destructoid. Archived from the original on August 15, 2016. Retrieved January 20, 2017.
 Gravity Rush review: Exactly the kind of original game that a freshfaced system such as Vita needs. Edge. June 11, 2012. Archived from the original on August 7, 2012. Retrieved June 13, 2012.
 Patterson, Mollie L May 24, 2012. Gravity Rush review. Electronic Gaming Monthly. Archived from the original on May 16, 2016. Retrieved January 20, 2017.
 Patterson, Mollie L January 26, 2016. Gravity Rush Remastered review. Electronic Gaming Monthly. Archived from the original on May 1, 2016. Retrieved January 20, 2017.
 Donlan, Christian February 20, 2012. Gravity Daze Review. Eurogamer. Archived from the original on March 10, 2016. Retrieved May 25, 2012.
 GRAVITY DAZE: Vita. Famitsu. Archived from the original on May 9, 2016. Retrieved January 20, 2017.
 Rykert, Dan May 24, 2012. Gravity Rush  Down Becomes Up In Sony Japans Solid Vita Debut. Game Informer. Archived from the original on November 22, 2012. Retrieved September 3, 2016.
 Brown, Peter January 26, 2016. Gravity Rush Remastered Review. GameSpot. Archived from the original on May 1, 2016. Retrieved January 20, 2017.
 Sullivan, Lucas May 24, 2012. Gravity Rush Review. GamesRadar. Archived from the original on October 3, 2015. Retrieved January 20, 2017.
 Towell, Justin January 27, 2016. Gravity Rush Remastered Review. GamesRadar. Archived from the original on January 7, 2017. Retrieved January 20, 2017.
 Sliva, Marty January 29, 2016. Gravity Rush Remastered Review Video. IGN via YouTube. Archived from the original on February 2, 2017. Retrieved January 20, 2017.
 Blain, Louise May 24, 2012. Grtavity Rush PS Vita Review. Official PlayStation Magazine. Archived from the original on August 28, 2014. Retrieved May 24, 2012.
 Welsh, Oli February 5, 2016. Gravity Rush Remastered Review. Eurogamer. Archived from the original on 30 April 2016. Retrieved January 20, 2017.
 Matthew, Handrahan February 16, 2012. Vita continues to struggle as 3DS tops Japanese charts. GamesIndustry.biz. Archived from the original on December 7, 2014. Retrieved January 31, 2018.
 PS VitaGRAVITY DAZE10 in Japanese. Inside Games. March 28, 2012. Archived from the original on September 24, 2015. Retrieved January 31, 2018.
 Rose, Mike June 18, 2012. FIFA 12 takes ninth UK number one as Euro 2012 kicks off. Gamasutra. Archived from the original on May 14, 2014. Retrieved January 31, 2018.
  in Japanese. The Nikkei. August 22, 2012. Archived from the original on January 15, 2018. Retrieved January 15, 2018. subscription required
 Ike, Sato December 16, 2015. This Week In Sales: Hardware, CostumeBreaking Weapon Girls... El Psy Kongroo. Siliconera. Archived from the original on February 18, 2016. Retrieved January 31, 2018.
  TOP5012713 in Japanese. Dengeki Online. December 17, 2015. Archived from the original on June 23, 2017. Retrieved January 31, 2018.
 Orry, James February 8, 2016. UK Video Game Chart: Black Ops 3 is back at No.1. VideoGamer.com. Archived from the original on July 6, 2017. Retrieved January 31, 2018.
 Japans Top Creators Discuss the Future of Games. July 24, 2012. Archived from the original on December 25, 2012. Retrieved November 19, 2012.
 Gravity Rush director alludes to sequel. September 21, 2012. Archived from the original on November 25, 2012. Retrieved November 19, 2012.
 Toyama, Keiichiro October 5, 2016. Gravity Rush 2 Update. PlayStation Blog. Archived from the original on October 6, 2016. Retrieved October 5, 2016.
 Kat From Gravity Rush Has Cameo In Hot Shots Golf. August 28, 2012. Archived from the original on December 3, 2012. Retrieved November 19, 2012.
 Sack it to Me: Gravity Rush Comes to LittleBigPlanet. November 19, 2012. Archived from the original on November 21, 2012. Retrieved November 19, 2012.
 First PlayStation AllStars DLC: Kat and Emmett Join the Battle Royale For Free!. November 15, 2012. Archived from the original on November 19, 2012. Retrieved November 19, 2012.
External links
Official website
Official website PlayStation 4 version
vte
Gravity Rush series
vte
Japan Game Award for Game of the Year
vte
Sony Interactive Entertainment Worldwide Studios
Categories: 2012 video gamesActionadventure gamesAction roleplaying video gamesAmnesia in fictionCancelled PlayStation 3 gamesOpen world video gamesPlayStation 4 gamesPlayStation Vita gamesRoleplaying video gamesSingleplayer video gamesSony Interactive Entertainment gamesSony franchisesVideo games developed in JapanVideo games featuring female protagonistsVideo games with celshaded animation

This is a good article. Follow the link for more information.
Watch Dogs
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
This article is about the video game. For other uses, see Watchdog.
Watch Dogs
Watch Dogs box art.jpg
DevelopersUbisoft Montreala
PublishersUbisoft
DirectorsJonathan Morin
ProducersDominic Guay
DesignersDanny Blanger
ProgrammersPatrice Zink
WritersKevin Shortt
ComposersBrian Reitzell
Platforms
Microsoft Windows
PlayStation 3
PlayStation 4
Xbox 360
Xbox One
Wii U
Release
27 May 2014show
GenresActionadventure
ModesSingleplayer, multiplayer
Watch Dogs stylized as WATCHDOGS is an actionadventure video game developed by Ubisoft Montreal and published by Ubisoft. It was released worldwide on 27 May 2014 for Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 3, PlayStation 4, Xbox 360, and Xbox One, and a Wii U version was released in November 2014. Set in a fictionalized, freeroam, open world version of Chicago, the singleplayer story follows hacker Aiden Pearces search for revenge after the killing of his niece. The game is played from a thirdperson perspective, and the world is navigated on foot or by vehicle. An online multiplayer mode allows up to eight players to engage in cooperative and competitive gameplay.

Development of the game began in 2009, and continued for over five years. Duties were shared by many of Ubisofts studios worldwide, with more than a thousand people involved. The developers visited Chicago to conduct field research on the setting, and used regional language for authenticity. Hacking features were created in consultation with the cybersecurity company Kaspersky Lab, and the ingame control system was based on SCADA. The score was composed by Brian Reitzell, who infused it with krautrock.

Following its announcement in June 2012, Watch Dogs was widely anticipated. Upon release, it received a mixed reception; praise was directed at the games hacking elements and mission variety, while criticism was expressed concerning the discrepancy in graphics quality between marketing and the real game, plot, and protagonist. Watch Dogs was a commercial success, breaking the record for the biggest firstday sales of a Ubisoft game and becoming the biggest launch of a new intellectual property in the United Kingdom at the time. The game has shipped over 10 million copies; its sequel, Watch Dogs 2, was released in November 2016.


Contents
1Gameplay
2Plot
3Development
4Release
5Reception
5.1Prerelease
5.2Postrelease
5.3Sales
5.4Awards
6Adaptation and sequel
7Notes
8References
9Further reading
10External links
Gameplay
The player character walking through an urban environment, using his smartphone to scan the area. The headsup display elements are visible onscreen.
Players can view descriptive backgrounds of pedestrians with the ingame smartphone.
Watch Dogs is an actionadventure game, played from a thirdperson view. The player controls hacker Aiden Pearce, who uses his smartphone to control trains and traffic lights, infiltrate security systems, jam cellphones, access pedestrians private information, and empty their bank accounts.3456 System hacking involves the solving of puzzles.6 The game is set in a fictionalized version of Chicago Windy City,4 an open world environment which permits freeroaming.7 It has a daynight cycle and dynamic weather system, which changes the behavior of nonplayer characters NPCs.8 For melee combat, Pearce has an extensible truncheon; other combat uses handguns, shotguns, sniper rifles, machine guns, and grenade launchers.691011 There is a slow motion option for gunplay,12 and the player can use proximity IEDs, grenades, and electronic lures.69 Lethal and nonlethal mission approaches can be enacted.13

Pearce can scale vertical surfaces, hack forklifts and aerial work platforms to reach places otherwise unreachable,14 and can crouch behind walls to hide from enemies.15 The player has an array of vehicles with which to navigate the setting, including motorcycles, muscle cars, offroad vehicles, SUVs, luxury vehicles, sports cars, and speedboats.89 The car radio is customizable, with about fifty songs.16 If the player steals a car, its driver can summon the police;9 if the player has a good reputation, the driver may acquiesce. A good reputation may be gained by detecting and stopping crimes, and a bad reputation results from committing crimes.1718 The skill tree is upgraded with points earned from hacking, combat, driving, and crafted items.19 Money can be used to purchase guns, outfits, and vehicles.69 There are several minigames, ranging from killing aliens to controlling a large, robotic spider.6916 QR codes and audio logs are included as collectibles;916 ctOS towers unlock map icons and side missions.6 Multiplayer mode can host up to seven other freeroaming players,20 with whom the player may complete hacking contracts and engage in races. The player can also be hacked by others, who will perceive the target as an NPC leaving the target to find the perpetrator. Ingame invasions can be disabled, but this will reset the multiplayer skill rank to zero.61621 Freeroaming with multiple players and decryption mode, where two teams of four are tasked with acquiring and holding data, were excluded from the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 versions.922

Plot
In October 2012, hacker Aiden Pearce and his mentor and partner, Damien Brenks, conduct an electronic bank heist at the highend Merlaut Hotel in Chicago and trigger a silent alarm set by another hacker. Brenks tries to find the hacker, giving himself and Pearce away. Fearing for his family, Pearce drives them to safety in the guise of a surprise trip to the country. On the way, hitman Maurice Vega fires a gunshot which crashes the car; Pearces niece lapses into a coma and dies. 11 months later, Pearce tracks down Vega at a baseball stadium in the Parker Square district of Chicago. After a fruitless interrogation about Vegas contractor he leaves Vega in the hands of his partner, Jordi Chin. While investigating, Brenks approaches Pearce with a request to find the other hacker from the Merlaut job. Pearce refuses, and Brenks retaliates by kidnapping his younger sister, which forces Pearce to comply with Brenks demands. With the help of Clara Lille, a member of the hacking syndicate DedSec, Pearce tracks down the second hackergang leader and former soldier Delford Iraq Wadeand obtains a data sample from Wades servers. He and Lille discover that Wade has information on almost every citizen of Chicago, protecting his gang from the authorities.

When they come across encrypted data beyond Lilles ability she tells Pearce to find Raymond Kenney, whose hacking caused the Northeast blackout of 2003 which led to the implementation of the ctOS operating system. After meeting Pearce and completing several tasks for him, Kenney agrees to help decrypt the data. Pearce assaults Wades compound, and downloads its server data. Wade confronts him, but Pearce kills him and leaves the compound. Another hacker, JB Defalt Markowicz, infiltrates their system, steals the information and deletes it from their servers. Markowicz leaves a recording that discloses Lilles involvement in locating Pearce and Brenks during the Merlaut job, which resulted in the death of Pearces niece. Pearce angrily tells Lille to leave. When the authorities later confront Brenks about the loss of the server data, he tells them Pearces identity. Pearce and Kenney find and take down Markowicz, retrieving the data in a car chase.

Pearce discovers where his sister is being held, frees her, and they drive to nearby Pawnee for safety. Kenney finds the contractor who ordered the hit on Pearces niece: Dermot Quinn, owner of the Merlaut Hotel. Pearce confronts Quinn, shutting off his pacemaker by hacking it. The dying Quinn says that he ordered the hit because he thought Pearce was searching for secret video footage of Mayor Donovan Rushmore with whom Quinn is associated, who accidentally murdered his secretary when she threatened to expose his dealings with Quinn. After Quinn dies, Pearce races to Lille who is ambushed and gunned down by Brenks men. Pearce uploads the video of Mayor Rushmore. He tries to find Brenks, who has unlocked ctOS giving him access to the city. Pearce infects ctOS with a virus which shuts down the system, causing a citywide blackout. He thus reaches Brenks, who is hiding in a lighthouse. Chin arrives, saying that he has switched allegiance, but Pearce injures him and kills Brenks. Chin calls Pearce one last time to tell him where Vega is kept; Pearce heads there, and decides his fate.

Development
Beginning in 2009 with ten people and expanding to over a thousand,232425 Watch Dogs was developed for over five years from prototype to finished game26 on a budget of about 68 million.27 Before its announcement in 2012, the game had the working title of Nexus.28 The initial sales pitch was the notion that one could control an entire city with the push of a button.26

Watch Dogs runs on the game engine Disrupt, which developer Ubisoft Montreal created for it29 although it was originally intended for another game in the Driver franchise.30 According to producer Dominic Guay, Disrupt has three pillars: simulation of the environment and its contents, how the environment can be affected, and the connectivity of a seamless online experience.31 Director Jonathan Morin said that the PlayStation 4 technology allowed for better wind and water simulations and artificial intelligence.23

Regional colloquialisms specific to Chicago were added to give the game authenticity. The developer traveled to the city several times for field research, photos, recording audio, meeting people, and interviewing the Chicago Police Department to gain insight. Landmarks were designed to only resemble their reallife counterparts, because their artistic rights would have tripled the budget. Fictionalizing Chicago allowed them to fit several district themes on one map.2532 The city was chosen as the setting for its contradictory nature, with great wealth and abject poverty.14 Morin said that after it was chosen, Chicago became the mostsurveilled city in America.33

The developers noted that character movements in games like Assassins Creed were the same in every situation, and attempted to rectify this in Watch Dogs to contextualize protagonist Aiden Pearce.23 The ingame control system ctOS was based on the SCADA system, and the story was inspired by the cyberattack by the computer worm Stuxnet on SCADA.34 The developers consulted the cybersecurity company Kaspersky Lab which discovered the Stuxnet worm about the hacking features to increase their authenticity.3536 To create hacking factions in the game like DedSec, the developer was influenced by the hacktivist group Anonymous, statesponsored hackers, and tales of corporate espionage.34

Grand Theft Auto and Saints Row were studied to develop complex controls, so the core hacking mechanic was limited to a single button.26 When the game was delayed, ideas long set aside like the hacking of a headset could be implemented.37 The score, by Brian Reitzell, was released on vinyl and CD by Invada Records in partnership with Ubisoft Music on 28 July 2014.38 Reitzell began composing by reading the script, concluding that krautrock would suit Watch Dogs.28 The game was released to manufacturing in May 2014.24

Release
Ubisoft announced Watch Dogs at its 4 June 2012 E3 press conference, confirming it for Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 3, and Xbox 360.4 A QR code that appeared in the first gameplay demonstration as viral marketing led to a website called DotConnexion, which contained information about the ingame world.39 PlayStation 4, Xbox One, and Wii U were announced in early 2013 as additional platforms for Watch Dogs, which was scheduled for release later that year.404142 Originally set to be released that November,43 the developer delayed it until early 2014 to not compromise on quality.44 The final release date was set for 27 May 2014,45 before its release for the Wii U on 18 November in North America, 20 November in Australia and New Zealand, and 21 November in Europe.4647 A free mobile app was released for iOS and Android devices, with Watch Dogs players connecting with console or PC users for two racing modes.48

Four collectors editions were available,43 and the GameStop preorder version contained a poster by Alex Ross.49 An eBook, nDark Clouds by John Shirley as a continuation of Watch Dogs, was released in conjunction with the game.50 Watch Dogs was marketed with a liveaction sequence directed by Devin Graham and a threepart documentary series by Motherboard, Phreaked Out.51 After promotional material was sent to Australian media as a safe containing the game and a voicemail explaining the delivery, the Sydney offices of Nine.com.au unaware of the voicemail called a bomb disposal unit when the safe beeped; Ubisoft apologized to the staff.52 Downloadable content Bad Blood, with playable character Raymond Kenney was released in September 2014.5354

Reception
Prerelease
Watch Dogs graphics and innovation impressed after the 2012 Electronic Entertainment Expo.555 According to leaked marketing material, it received over eighty E3 awards and nominations and G4tv called it a truly nextgen adventure.56 At the 2013 Electronic Entertainment Expo, the game received over fifty awards and nominations.57 The following year, Ubisoft was accused of graphical downgrading after a NeoGAF forum post compared its 2012 visuals to 2014 video footage.58

Postrelease
Reception
Aggregate score
AggregatorScore
MetacriticPC 7710059 
PS4 8010060 
XONE 7810061 
WIIU 6210062
Review scores
PublicationScore
Destructoid81016
Eurogamer7106
Game Informer8.51063
GameSpot8109
GamesRadar45 stars64
Giant Bomb35 stars65
IGN8.41066
PC Gamer US8.71067
Polygon81012
VideoGamer.com71068
According to Ubisoft researcher Thomas Geffroyd, studies and quantitative analysis indicated that about sixty percent of gamers changed their view of technology after playing Watch Dogs.69 Chris Carter of Destructoid liked the virtual rendition of Chicago and the detail of nonplayer characters, concluding that the gameplay was fun. His favorite feature was the extra content, like collectibles and minigames.16 Eurogamers Dan Whitehead found the carhandling slick and intuitive and called the visuals dazzling.6 In Game Informer, Jeff Marchiafava wrote that the hacking added meaning to the combat, the shooting mechanic makes fullscale firefights enjoyable, and praised the stealth approach. He found that the variety of gameplay and environments in the campaign missions provided an entertaining experience.63 Kevin VanOrd of GameSpot thought the games primary strength was in combat and was grateful for the hacking components contribution. VanOrd said that the story only flourished when it left behind the revengestory cliches, and he felt more attached to supporting characters than to Aiden Pearce. He praised the games open world, particularly its extra content.9

At GamesRadar, Andy Hartup said he enjoyed the set pieces and individual missions: Youll enjoy Watch Dogs narrative in piecemeal, rather than as a whole. He praised the settings details which he thought revealed the citys true beauty, and called the combat and hacking satisfying.64 Dan Stapleton of IGN praised the games visuals and the open worlds intricately detailed map. He also enjoyed the combat: The coverbased gunplay feels good.66 PC Gamers Christopher Livingston called the hacking the games most positive feature; although he liked the stealth, his favorite approach to battle was gunplay.67 For Polygon, Arthur Gies praised the combats gunplay feature and wrote that it was aided by a good, functional thirdperson cover system, which helps with more than just shooting  it also allows for effective stealth.12 Steven Burns of VideoGamer.com called the game undoubtedly enjoyable, but it wont linger long in the memory.68

Carter was dissatisfied with the story, citing lifeless characters and calling the plots events fairly predictable and cliched; the graphics were thought inferior to the games marketing footage.16 Whitehead criticized the hacking for resorting to tired old PipeManiastyle puzzles and saw the story and main character as the games weakest aspects, saying that the script avoided the moral dilemmas offered by its setup.6 Marchiafava agreed with Carter that the graphics were less impressive than they were in early videos, criticizing poor character design and the story for not living up to its gameplay.63 Like Whitehead, VanOrd said that the predicament surrounding technology rarely reaches any conclusions or digs very deeply.9

Hartup criticized the main character, calling him a bit of a dullard, and faulted the story for its reliance on unimaginative stereotypes.64 Jeff Gerstmann of Giant Bomb criticized the story and characters for a lack of organization, which he said made it difficult to care about the game.65 Stapleton disliked the main characters lack of personality, and found the supporting cast more interesting.66 Livingston saw little to like in the story, and also preferred another character to Pearce.67 Gies wrote about the plot, After a promising albeit welltrod start, Watch Dogs plot struggles to remain coherent, noting that the characters felt like caricatures.12

Sales
Watch Dogs was Ubisofts most preordered new intellectual property IP, their secondhighest preordered title, the most preordered game of the year more than 800,000 copies, and the most preordered game for the eighth generation of video game consoles. The companys executives predicted over 6.3 million copies in overall sales.151

The day it was released, Watch Dogs sold the most copies of any Ubisoft title in a 24hour period.70 It was the bestselling new IP ever in the United Kingdom in its first week beating Assassins Creed IIIs record by more than 17 percent, and was the seventeenthlargest game launch of all time in the UK. Most sales were for PlayStation 4, whose hardware sales increased by 94 percent because of Watch Dogs.71 After the first week, four million copies of the game had been sold.72 Watch Dogs sold 63,000 copies of the PlayStation 4 version and 31,000 for PlayStation 3 in its Japanese debut.73 By July 2014, the game had sold over eight million copies.74 It was the biggest videogame launch of the year in Britain until Destiny was released in September, and the thirdbestselling game during the second week of that month.75 Nine million copies had been shipped worldwide in October, twothirds of which were for the PC, PlayStation 4, and Xbox One.76 According to Ubisofts sales figures, Watch Dogs had sold ten million copies by the fiscal quarter ending 31 December 2014.77

Awards
YearAwardCategoryResultRef.
2012Game Critics Awards Best of E3 2012Special Commendation for GraphicsWon55
Special Commendation for InnovationWon
30th Golden Joystick AwardsOne to WatchNominated7879
2013Game Critics Awards Best of E3 2013Best of ShowNominated8081
Best Original GameNominated
Best Console GameNominated
Best ActionAdventure GameWon
Best Online MultiplayerNominated
31st Golden Joystick AwardsMost WantedNominated8283
VGX 2013Most Anticipated GameNominated84
201432nd Golden Joystick AwardsBest Original GameNominated8586
Best MultiplayerNominated
Best Gaming Moment being invadedNominated
Game of the YearNominated
Studio of the Year Ubisoft MontrealWon
Giant Bombs 2014 Game of the Year AwardsMost Disappointing GameWon87
National Academy of Video Game Trade Reviewers NAVGTR awardsLightingTexturing JeanPhilippe LerouxNominated88
Performance in a Drama, Supporting Aaron Douglas as Jordi ChinNominated
Game, Original Adventure Jonathan MorinNominated
Control Design, 3DNominated
Adaptation and sequel
In June 2013, Variety reported that Ubisoft Motion Pictures was planning a film adaptation.89 That August, Sony Pictures Entertainment and New Regency were announced to be partnering with Ubisoft Motion Pictures on the project.90 Paul Wernick and Rhett Reese were later commissioned to write the film.91 A sequel, Watch Dogs 2, was released in November 2016.92

Notes
 Additional work by Ubisoft Reflections, Ubisoft Paris, Ubisoft Quebec, and Ubisoft Bucharest;1 Ubisoft Reflections contributed nearly ninety staff members.2
References
 Brightman, James 15 May 2014. Watch Dogs becomes Ubisofts most preordered new IP. GamesIndustry.biz. Archived from the original on 1 October 2014.
 Weber, Rachel 28 February 2013. On Reflections: First interview with the Ubisoft studios new MD. GamesIndustry.biz. Archived from the original on 26 February 2015.
 Langshaw, Mark 5 June 2012. E3 2012: Watch Dogs announced by Ubisoft  watch video. Digital Spy. Archived from the original on 12 October 2017.
 Goldfarb, Andrew 4 June 2012. E3 2012: Ubisoft Reveals Watch Dogs. IGN. Archived from the original on 17 May 2014.
 Kollar, Philip 4 June 2012. Watch Dogs trailer stuns E3 with nextgenlevel graphics. Polygon. Archived from the original on 5 January 2013.
 Whitehead, Dan 27 May 2014. Watch Dogs review. Eurogamer. Archived from the original on 27 May 2014.
 McLaughlin, Rus 4 June 2012. You are the network in Ubisofts Watch Dogs. GamesBeat. Archived from the original on 5 January 2013.
 Karmali, Luke 27 March 2014. Watch Dogs Hacks, Vehicles and Weather Discussed. IGN. Archived from the original on 7 April 2014.
 VanOrd, Kevin 27 May 2014. Watch Dogs Review. GameSpot. Archived from the original on 27 May 2014.
 Garratt, Patrick 4 June 2012. E3 2012: Watch Dogs is Ubisoft Montreals next IP. VG247. Archived from the original on 12 October 2017.
 Steinman, Gary 13 May 2014. What Makes Watch Dogs a True NextGen Game. Ubisoft. Archived from the original on 14 May 2014.
 Gies, Arthur 27 May 2014. Watch Dogs review: spook country. Polygon. Archived from the original on 30 June 2016.
 Shuman, Sid 10 May 2013. WatchDogs: 7 things you need to know about the futuretech action epic. PlayStation Blog. Archived from the original on 11 January 2018.
 Watch Dogs: Creative Director On Building The Game. GamesTM. Archived from the original on 11 January 2018.
 Scoville, Max 23 April 2014. Video: Watch Dogs Jonathan Morin talks delays, multiplayer, and the franchises future. Destructoid.
 Carter, Chris 27 May 2014. Review: Watch Dogs. Destructoid. Archived from the original on 27 May 2014.
 Lewis, Anne 12 May 2014. Watch Dogs  Reputation. Ubisoft.
 Hernandez, Patricia 27 June 2013. Maybe Watch Dogs Protagonist Isnt Actually The Good Guy. Kotaku. Archived from the original on 1 July 2013.
 Rosenberg, Adam 27 May 2014. Who watches the Watch Dogs? A guide to getting started in Ubisofts hacker paradise. Digital Trends. Archived from the original on 30 May 2014.
 Cook, Dave 7 March 2014. Watch Dogs: 8player free roam mode confirmed by Ubisoft. VG247. Archived from the original on 7 March 2014.
 Wallace, Kimberley 23 April 2014. Breaking Down Watch Dogs Multiplayer Modes  Will They Be Meaningful?. Game Informer. Archived from the original on 17 May 2014.
 Makuch, Eddie 13 May 2014. Watch Dogs runs at 900p on PS4, 792p on Xbox One. GameSpot. Archived from the original on 14 May 2014.
 Dutton, Fred 16 May 2013. WatchDogs: Behind the scenes with 2013s rulebreaking action epic. PlayStation Blog. Archived from the original on 11 January 2018.
 Pereira, Chris 14 May 2014. Watch Dogs goes gold, on track for release later this month. GameSpot. Archived from the original on 17 May 2014.
 Hoad, Phil 10 June 2013. From Watch Dogs to GTA V, why video games are going to reshape our cities. The Guardian. Archived from the original on 11 June 2014.
 Nutt, Christian 23 April 2014. HackMan: An interview with Watch Dogs creative director. Gamasutra. Archived from the original on 8 June 2014.
 Cook, Dave 16 January 2014. Watch Dogs: predelay budget was 68 million, producer claims. VG247. Archived from the original on 12 October 2017.
 Carle, Darren 23 July 2014. Old Dog, New Tricks: Brian Reitzell on scoring Watch Dogs. The Skinny. Archived from the original on 12 January 2018.
 Hillier, Brenna 26 February 2013. Watch Dogs built on allnew engine, doesnt share Assassins Creed tech. VG247. Archived from the original on 30 June 2013.
 Goldfarb, Andrew 18 December 2013. Ubisoft: Watch Dogs Engine Was Originally Built for Driver. IGN. Archived from the original on 1 June 2014.
 Lewis, Anne 10 July 2013. The Secrets Behind Watch Dogs Next Gen Experience. Ubisoft. Archived from the original on 12 July 2013.
 de Matos, Xav 28 May 2014. Why you cant visit Soldier Field in Watch Dogs. Engadget. Archived from the original on 12 January 2018.
 Nye Griffiths, Daniel 4 September 2013. Jonathan Morin, Creative Director of Watch Dogs, Interviewed: Surveillance And The City. Forbes. Archived from the original on 11 January 2018.
 Starkey, Dan 31 December 2013. Hacktivists and Watch Dogs: How realworld threats inspired Ubisoft Montreals new openworld. Engadget. Archived from the original on 12 January 2018.
 Kietzmann, Ludwig 10 May 2013. Watch Dogs getting hacking feedback from security firm Kaspersky Lab. Engadget. Archived from the original on 12 October 2017.
 Kushner, David 26 February 2013. The Real Story of Stuxnet. IEEE Spectrum. Archived from the original on 11 September 2015.
 Steinman, Gary 6 March 2014. Why Was Watch Dogs Delayed?. Ubisoft. Archived from the original on 13 May 2014.
 Minsker, Evan 28 May 2014. Brian Reitzells Watch Dogs Video Game Soundtrack to Be Released by Portisheads Geoff Barrows Invada Records: Listen to Three Tracks. Pitchfork. Archived from the original on 28 May 2014.
 Grubb, Jeff 4 June 2012. Heres where that Watch Dogs cubehead QR code goes. GamesBeat. Archived from the original on 12 October 2017.
 Tach, Dave 20 February 2013. Watch Dogs bound for PS4 at the consoles launch. Polygon. Archived from the original on 2 February 2015.
 Hinkle, David 20 February 2013. Ubisoft confirms Watch Dogs for Wii U. Engadget. Archived from the original on 12 October 2017.
 Makuch, Eddie 21 May 2013. Watch Dogs, Assassins Creed IV confirmed for Xbox One. GameSpot. Archived from the original on 17 May 2014.
 Karmali, Luke 29 April 2013. Watch Dogs Release Date And Collectors Editions Announced. IGN. Archived from the original on 18 May 2014.
 Makuch, Eddie 15 October 2013. Watch Dogs delayed to spring 2014. GameSpot. Archived from the original on 15 October 2013.
 Makuch, Eddie 6 March 2014. Watch Dogs release date announced for everything except Wii U. GameSpot. Archived from the original on 7 March 2014.
 Kubba, Sinan 10 September 2014. Ubisoft confirms Watch Dogs Wii U for November 18. Engadget. Archived from the original on 13 October 2017.
 Van Daal, Joel 11 September 2014. Watch Dogs Wii U gets ANZ release date. Trade Media.
 Makuch, Eddie 27 May 2014. Watch Dogs companion app out now and you dont even need to own the game. GameSpot. Archived from the original on 17 January 2018.
 Gaudiosi, John 1 May 2013. Alex Ross Talks WatchDogs Poster, Digital Comics And Video Games As Art. Forbes. Archived from the original on 9 January 2018.
 Macy, Seth G. 17 April 2014. Ubisoft Announces Watch Dogs eBook. IGN. Archived from the original on 18 September 2014.
 Graser, Marc 20 May 2014. Smart Promo: Why Ubisofts Watch Dogs Campaign is the Right Way to Launch a New Game Franchise. Variety.
 Makuch, Eddie 28 May 2014. Watch Dogs PR stunt goes wrong, bomb squad called in. GameSpot. Archived from the original on 29 May 2014.
 Steinman, Gary 3 September 2014. Watch Dogs  Bad Blood Exposed. Ubisoft. Archived from the original on 10 January 2018.
 Krupa, Daniel 15 September 2014. How Watch Dogs Bad Blood DLC Changes the Game. IGN. Archived from the original on 10 January 2018.
 North, Dale 26 June 2012. The Last of Us sweeps the E3 2012 Game Critics Awards. Destructoid. Archived from the original on 22 March 2014.
 Schreier, Jason 15 February 2013. Watch Dogs Will Be Out This Holiday For All Home Consoles, Leaked Poster Says UPDATE. Kotaku. Archived from the original on 11 April 2013.
 Lewis, Anne 28 June 2013. E3 2013 Awards Roundup. Ubisoft. Archived from the original on 19 June 2015.
 Makuch, Eddie 7 March 2014. Watch Dogs visuals have not been downgraded, Ubisoft says. GameSpot. Archived from the original on 8 March 2014.
 Watch Dogs PC. Metacritic. Archived from the original on 10 January 2018.
 Watch Dogs PlayStation 4. Metacritic. Archived from the original on 10 January 2018.
 Watch Dogs Xbox One. Metacritic. Archived from the original on 10 January 2018.
 Watch Dogs Wii U. Metacritic. Archived from the original on 10 January 2018.
 Marchiafava, Jeff 27 May 2014. Watch Dogs. Game Informer. Archived from the original on 27 May 2014.
 Hartup, Andy 27 May 2014. Watch Dogs Review. GamesRadar. Archived from the original on 27 May 2014.
 Gerstmann, Jeff 27 May 2014. Watch Dogs Review. Giant Bomb. Archived from the original on 27 May 2014.
 Stapleton, Dan 27 May 2014. Watch Dogs Review. IGN. Archived from the original on 27 May 2014.
 Livingston, Christopher 27 May 2014. Watch Dogs review. PC Gamer. Archived from the original on 24 August 2015.
 Burns, Steven 27 May 2014. Watch Dogs Review. VideoGamer.com. Archived from the original on 10 January 2018.
 Takahashi, Dean 26 October 2016. Ubisoft researcher scouted Watch Dogs 2 by hanging out with hacktivists in SF and DefCon. GamesBeat. Archived from the original on 24 November 2016.
 Matulef, Jeffrey 28 May 2014. Watch Dogs outsold any Ubisoft game ever in 24 hours. Eurogamer. Archived from the original on 28 May 2014.
 Phillips, Tom 2 June 2014. Watch Dogs is the biggest new IP launch in the UK ever. Eurogamer. Archived from the original on 2 June 2014.
 Martin, Matt 3 June 2014. Watch Dogs sells 4 million in first week. Eurogamer. Archived from the original on 3 June 2014.
 Romano, Sal 2 July 2014. Media Create Sales: 62314  62914. Gematsu. Archived from the original on 2 July 2014.
 Matulef, Jeffrey 10 July 2014. Watch Dogs has shipped over 8 million units. Eurogamer. Archived from the original on 11 July 2014.
 YinPoole, Wesley 15 September 2014. Destiny UKs biggest new IP launch ever. Eurogamer. Archived from the original on 15 September 2014.
 Makuch, Eddie 30 October 2014. Watch Dog Ships 9 Million Copies, Helping Ubisoft Sales Rise Sharply. GameSpot. Archived from the original on 31 October 2014.
 Ubisoft 12 February 2015. Ubisoft reports third quarter 201415 sales PDF. Archived PDF from the original on 10 January 2018.
 Reynolds, Matthew 23 August 2012. Golden Joystick Awards 2012 public voting now open. Digital Spy. Archived from the original on 30 March 2016.
 Martin, Liam 26 October 2012. Skyrim voted Game of the Year at 2012 Golden Joystick Awards. Digital Spy. Archived from the original on 11 January 2018.
 Pitcher, Jenna 26 June 2013. Game Critics Awards announces Best of E3 2013 nominees, Titanfall dominates. Polygon. Archived from the original on 22 March 2014.
 Corriea, Alexa Ray 2 July 2013. Titanfall dominates E3 2013 Game Critics Awards with six wins. Polygon. Archived from the original on 3 September 2013.
 Leack, Jonathan 29 August 2013. Golden Joystick Awards Announces Game of the Year 2013 Nominees. CraveOnline. Archived from the original on 11 January 2018.
 Staff 25 October 2013. Here are your Golden Joystick Award winners 2013. GamesRadar. Archived from the original on 1 March 2015.
 McWhertor, Michael 18 November 2013. Spike VGX 2013 award nominees announced. Polygon. Archived from the original on 18 November 2013.
 Reynolds, Matthew 24 September 2014. Golden Joystick Awards 2014 public voting now open. Digital Spy. Archived from the original on 11 January 2018.
 Arce, Nicole 28 October 2014. Golden Joystick Awards 2014: The winners are... Tech Times. Archived from the original on 11 January 2018.
 Staff 27 December 2014. Giant Bombs 2014 Game of the Year Awards: Day Two Text Recap. Giant Bomb. Archived from the original on 27 December 2014.
 2014 NAVGTR Winners: Dragon 5, AlienMordorSouth Park 4. NAVGTR. 16 February 2015. Archived from the original on 17 February 2015.
 Graser, Marc 12 June 2013. Ubisoft To Make Movies Based on Watch Dogs, Far Cry, Rabbids EXCLUSIVE. Variety.
 Kain, Erik 20 August 2013. Sony And Ubisoft Team Up On Watch Dogs Feature Film. Forbes. Archived from the original on 12 October 2017.
 Fleming Jr, Mike 24 April 2014. Zombieland Scribes Wernick  Reese To Script Ubisofts Watch Dogs For Sony  New Regency: Video. Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on 9 January 2018.
 Phillips, Tom 7 June 2016. Watch Dogs 2 launches November, set in San Francisco. Eurogamer. Archived from the original on 7 June 2016.
Further reading
Hodgson, David S. J. 2014. Watch Dogs: Prima Official Game Guide. Prima Games. ISBN 9780804161435.
Shirley, John 2014. nDark Clouds. Ubisoft. ASIN B00JS59ZK4.
External links
Official website
WPVG icon 2016.svgVideo Games portalSamsung Galaxy S5 Vector.svg2010s portal
vte
Ubisoft
Franchises
Anno Assassins Creed Brothers in Arms Call of Juarez The Crew The Crew 2 CSI Driver Far Cry Imagine Just Dance Might and Magic Myst Petz Prince of Persia Rayman Raving Rabbids Red Steel The Settlers Silent Hunter Tom Clancys Ghost Recon Rainbow Six Splinter Cell Watch Dogs List of Ubisoft games
Subsidiaries
Blue Byte Ivory Tower Ketchapp Leamington Massive Entertainment Montpellier Montreal Motion Pictures Nadeo Quazal Quebec RedLynx Red Storm Entertainment Reflections Singapore Toronto List of Ubisoft subsidiaries
Technology
AnvilNext Jade LyN Snowdrop UbiArt Framework Uplay
Categories: 2014 video gamesActionadventure gamesAsymmetrical multiplayer video gamesAugmented reality in fictionCameras in fictionCorporate warfare in fictionCybernetted society in fictionCyberpunk video gamesGangs in fictionHacking video gamesMalware in fictionMultiplayer and singleplayer video gamesNintendo Network gamesOpen world video gamesParkour video gamesPlayStation 3 gamesPlayStation 4 gamesPostcyberpunkPrisons in fictionPropaganda in fictionScience fiction video gamesStealth video gamesUbisoft gamesVideo games about revengeVideo games developed in CanadaVideo games set in 2012Video games set in 2013Video games set in ChicagoVideo games with downloadable contentWii U eShop gamesWii U gamesWindows gamesXbox 360 gamesXbox One games

Watch Dogs 2
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
Watch Dogs 2
Watch Dogs 2.jpg
DevelopersUbisoft Montreala
PublishersUbisoft
Directors
Jonathan Morin
Patrick Plourde
Danny Blanger
ProducersDominic Guay
DesignersAlexandre Pedneault
Writers
Madeleine Hart
Jesse Scoble
James Russell Lees
Ethan Petty
Jared Schincariol
Diana Rose Sherman
Lucien Soulban
Leanne TaylorGiles
ComposersHudson Mohawke
Platforms
PlayStation 4
Xbox One
Microsoft Windows
Release
PlayStation 4, Xbox One
15 November 2016
Microsoft Windows
29 November 2016
GenresActionadventure
ModesSingleplayer, multiplayer
Watch Dogs 2 stylized as WATCHDOGS 2 is an actionadventure video game developed by Ubisoft Montreal and published by Ubisoft. It is the sequel to 2014s Watch Dogs and was released worldwide for PlayStation 4, Xbox One and Microsoft Windows in November 2016. Set within a fictionalized version of the San Francisco Bay Area, the game is played from a thirdperson perspective and its open world is navigated onfoot or by vehicle. Players control Marcus Holloway, a hacker who works with the hacking group DedSec to take down the citys advanced surveillance system known as ctOS. There are multiple ways to complete missions, and each successful assignment increases the follower count of DedSec. Cooperative multiplayer allows for competitive oneonone combat and connecting with other players in order to neutralize a player who is causing havoc.

Ubisoft Montreal, the games developer, studied player feedback from the first game to assess what could be improved in Watch Dogs 2 and the setting was researched by making frequent trips to California. Ubisoft Reflections was responsible for overhauling the driving mechanic. Real hackers were consulted to validate scripts and game mechanics for authenticity and references to real life hacktivism were fictionalized, like the Project Chanology protest. The original soundtrack for Watch Dogs 2 was composed by Hudson Mohawke. The game was released to overall positive reception from critics which praised the game for improving upon the original Watch Dogs in areas like the hacking, setting, characters and driving. However, character inconsistencies, firearms and frequent technical issues  later patched  were cited as imperfections.


Contents
1Gameplay
1.1Multiplayer
2Plot
3Development
4Release
4.1Downloadable content
5Reception
5.1Critical response
5.2Sales
6Notes
7References
8External links
Gameplay
Similar to its predecessor, Watch Dogs 2 is an actionadventure game with stealth elements1 and played from a thirdperson perspective as protagonist Marcus Holloway, a young hacker, the game features an open world environment set in a fictionalized version of the San Francisco Bay Area,23 an area more than twice as large as the Chicago setting from Watch Dogs.4 The Bay Area consists of four different areas: San Francisco, Oakland, Marin, and Silicon Valley, all of which have different characteristics and aesthetics.5 Players can navigate the games world onfoot or by the various vehicles featured in the game, such as cars, trucks, buses, cable cars, motorcycles, quad bikes, and boats.6 The driving mechanic was overhauled and designed to be more accessible.7 The player can shoot their weapons while driving.8 Marcus also has improved acrobatic skills, and the ability to parkour around the city.9 The player can use different methods to approach the games missions, choosing between the aggressive approach, in which they defeat enemies with guns which are made with a 3D printer; explosives, like mines; or Marcus own melee weapon, a billiard ball attached to a bungee cord. Alternatively, the player can use the stealth approach, in which they can evade enemies or paralyze them temporarily with Marcus taser.39 The player can also complete the game through hacking alone.10 When the player commits too many crimes, the police officers will become alerted and will attempt to arrest the player.11 The game upgrades system is a returning feature, with items being divided into three categories: Ghost, Aggressor, and Trickster. The player can choose their upgrades in accordance with their own playstyle.8


Players can hack the environment around them to advance in the missions.
Marcus can hack into various electronic devices connected to the ctOS system with his ingame smartphone.3 For example, Marcus can modify the personal information of nonplayer characters to have them arrested,4 hack and manipulate every mobile phone featured in the game, disrupt traffic by hacking cars and traffic lights, hack into monitoring cameras, and carry out mass hacking, which hacks the electrical equipment of a large group of people.12 The player can also gain multiple options while hacking the same object. For instance, if the player attempts to hack a car, they can gain direct control over them, or have the car lose control and crash in a random direction. If the player hacks a junction box, they can choose whether they should deactivate it or turn it into a proximity mine.13 Unlike Aiden, the protagonist of the first game, Marcus has an arsenal of advanced equipment, including a quadcopter and remotecontrolled car, both of which can be used for remote hacking and scouting.6 Marcus apparel can be customized with over 700 articles of clothing, available for purchase in stores that maintain fashion styles unique to what is worn by the denizens in each area.14 The game features several main story missions, and sidemissions known as operations. Once completed, Marcus follower count will increase.15

Multiplayer
Multiplayer returns in Watch Dogs 2. The game introduces a seamless cooperative multiplayer mode, in which players can meet and interact with other random players. They can explore the open world and complete missions together, which will also help players to gain followers. The game features an emote system, which allows players characters to communicate with each other through basic gestures. The game can be played completely online or offline.3 It also features four competitive multiplayer modes:

Hacking Invasion: A oneversusone competitive multiplayer mode, originally featured in the first game, in which a player covertly joins another players singleplayer session and steals virtual data from them. The invading player must stay hidden while stealing the data, while the defending player must identify and kill the invading player.16
Bounty Hunter: A new mode introduced in the game. If an online player creates too much chaos in the world, the mode will be initiated. Police, alongside one to three other players, will join the players game with the hope of killing the hunted and claiming the bounty, which gives them experience points. The hunted could either strike back at the hunters by killing them, which gives them greater rewards, or escape from them until the bounty expires.317 The hunted, meanwhile, also can be assisted by another player if that player chooses to join the hunted. Players can manually place a bounty on themselves using the ingame smartphone.18
Showdown: A mode added in an update. In this mode, 2 teams of 2 players battle each other in short missions. Missions vary from the first team to steal 3 hard drives to the offensive team having to hack the servers the defensive team is protecting in a limited amount of time.3
Racing: A mode added in an update. Up to four players compete in headtohead races to reach the finish line with drones, ekarts, boats, and bikes.19
Plot
Three years after the events of Chicago, San Francisco has become the next city to install the ctOS central Operating System, which connects everyone with everything. Hacker Marcus Holloway Ruffin Prentiss is punished for a crime he did not commit by the upgraded ctOS  ctOS 2.0  which categorizes him as the suspect. Realizing the system covertly brings harm to the innocent citizens of San Francisco, he decides to work with the hacking group DedSec to take down the ctOS 2.0, and Blume, the company behind it. Marcus joins DedSec and works with fellow hackers Sitara Tasya Teles, Wrench Shawn Baichoo, Horatio Michael Xavier and Josh Jonathan Dubsky, and they begin using their skills to expose corrupt organizations and corporations that are secretly using stolen personal ctOS data for their own ends. The game begins with Marcus  known also by his hacker alias Retr0  having an initiation test: deleting his own ctOS profile. Accepted into DedSec, he is alerted to a Church called New Dawn that serves as a criminal organization, after which, Marcus mainly serves to bring about awareness of the hackers goals through both social media and hacks to help get enough computers to bring down Blume, the figurehead of ctOS. Eventually, they stumble upon the existence of a subliminal message and Bellwether, a data manipulation program being fed ctOS data by Duan Nemec Christopher Jacot, Blumes CTO, to manipulate world finance and politics. DedSec later manages to recruit the assistance of Raymond TBone Kenney John Tench, who is determined to battle Blume three years after attacking the ctOS in Chicago.

With his assistance, DedSec manages to expose the corruption of the FBI and numerous Silicon Valley corporations through the hacking of their data facilities. Learning that Blume is planning to install a satellite network designed to bypass undersea data cables, which would effectively give Blume a monopoly on the entire worlds electronic data and stock exchanges, they infiltrate the launch area of one of the satellites to install a backdoor. To bring down Blume and Duan for good, Marcus breaks into all of Blumes international headquarters and lastly their San Francisco headquarters and hacks their servers, exposing the existence of Bellwether and Duans corruption. Duan is arrested for fraud and Blume is put under investigation, though DedSec resolve to continue their fight against Blume. In an extended ending scene added in a postrelease patch, two unidentified individuals note that more DedSec cells and hacktivist groups have been emerging worldwide in response to the San Francisco Blume scandal, and that it is time to put their own plans into motion. The filename of the recording seen in the ending is a set of coordinates located in Brixton, London.

Development

Ubisoft Reflections refurbished the driving mechanic in its entirety.
At E3 2014, Ubisoft executive Tony Key claimed that they were very satisfied with the sales of the first game, and that the brand would be turned into a longrunning franchise.20 According to creative director Jonathan Morin, the first games main goal was to establish the Watch Dogs brand. It was intended that they take risks with the sequel, instead of creating a more polished version of the previous game.21 To improve the game, Morin and his team read the reviews of the first game, and visited NeoGAF and various forums to study player feedback. Their priorities included creating a believable environment, giving players more freedom, and introducing a new leading character, whose personality would be completely different from that of the protagonist of the first game, Aiden Pearce.15 The primary developer Ubisoft Montreal worked with other subsidiaries Ubisoft Toronto, Ubisoft Paris, Ubisoft Bucharest, Ubisoft Kiev, and Ubisoft Reflections to aid in the production.22 The driving mechanic was completely overhauled to make it more accessible to players, and was developed by Ubisoft Reflections, the developer of Ubisofts own Driver series.23 In light of complaints about a graphical downgrade in Watch Dogs from what was seen at E3 2012, Ubisoft assured that Watch Dogs 2 would not suffer the same outcome because, unlike the first installment, it was developed for PlayStation 4 and Xbox One from the start.24 Another improvement from the first game was a more prominent thematic connection to the narrative.25 Main operations are structured like story arcs that last up to ninety minutes each, advancing the plot with each completion.26

The developer worked with consultant hackers who would validate their scripts, including the use of jargon, and gameplay mechanics in order to ensure the authenticity of the subject matter. The propaganda used by the games hacker group DedSec was influenced by animated GIF culture, glitch art and comic books from the late 1940s.27 David Maynor served as a hacking advisor.28 Content director Thomas Geffroyd, who had twenty years of experience with the hacking community, was tasked to accumulate information from hacktivists  such as author Violet Blue  and then relay it to the team. The game also features references to real life; Project Chanology was fictionalized in the mission The False Prophets.29

Ubisoft Montreal made frequent scouting trips to California to research the setting, and attempted to put most of the local landmarks in that region in the game. For regions that they could not put in the game, the team redesigned these locations and put them back into the game. According to producer Dominic Guay, having realistic and accurate locations featured in the game was essential for the game as they encourage players to explore the open world. Unlike many of Ubisofts previous open world games, players do not need to climb towers in order to discover locations and missions. Instead, the game is opened up from the start, allowing players to explore the city freely. The games new progression system, which tasks players to gain followers instead of completing main missions, was another way Ubisoft Montreal hoped to encourage exploration and make the city feel more free.3031 Watch Dogs 2 had around sixty programmers devoted to its development.32

The soundtrack was composed by Hudson Mohawke. Ingrained with a combination of electronic music and hip hop, it was approached from the palette of cult science fiction music.33 Ubisoft teamed up with Dutch music producer Oliver Heldens to influence the video for his track Good Life in the vein of DedSec.34 For acquiring licensed songs, an agreement was made with Amoeba Music.32 Mohawkes soundtrack was released separately as DedSec  Watch Dogs 2 Original Game Soundtrack via Warp Records.35

A sequel to Watch Dogs was rumored since its release but first officialized by publisher Ubisoft through financial reports in February36 and May 2016,37 before it was confirmed as a part of the 2016 E3 lineup. A 20minute online reveal was hosted a couple of days later.38 On 27 October 2016, Watch Dogs 2 was announced to have been released to manufacturing.39

Release
On 8 June 2016, Ubisoft revealed the game would be released on 15 November of that year for Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 4 and Xbox One in six separate editions.40 In September 2016, it was announced that Watch Dogs 2 would have enhancements on PlayStation 4 Pro.41 In October 2016, Ubisoft announced that the Windows version was delayed to 29 November 2016 to ensure that the game was welloptimized.42 It was featured on the front cover of Edge in August.43 Two weeks from release, Ubisoft and Samsung partnered to bundle a free digital download of Watch Dogs 2 with the purchase of their solidstate disks or curved gaming monitors.44 Amazon Prime copies were subject to an early release, which revealed issues with the seamless multiplayer. Ubisoft vowed to repair the feature on schedule45 but on the day of release, the company said it was broken  citing persistent lagging and crashing.46 Cooperative multiplayer was enabled a week after the games release.47 A free trial lasting three hours was released for PlayStation 4 on 17 January 2017; the Xbox One version was downloadable on 24 January.48

Preordering The Gold Edition Collectors Edition included additional content such as weapon skins, vehicles and drones; the Deluxe Collectors Edition contains the same, but excluded the season pass. Each of these, as well as the generic Collectors Edition, contained a physical robot called Wrench Junior, controlled by a mobile app on a smartphone or tablet computer. The Gold Edition came with the same items and season pass, and while the Deluxe Edition omitted the inclusion of the season pass, it contained all other additions.49 The mission Zodiac Killer was also exclusive to preorder purchases. It involves the protagonist Marcus Holloway in chasing a copycat killer emulating the same modus operandi as the Zodiac Killer.50 Amazon and Twitch Prime members were privy to free content like XP boosts and skin packs.51 ScoutXpedition, a PlayStation 4 preorder bonus mission, became free to download in January 2017.52

List of Watch Dogs 2 editions 
Downloadable content
Five downloadable content DLC packs have been released: the TBone Content Bundle, Human Conditions, No Compromise, Root Access Bundle, and Psychedelic Pack.5354 As per an exclusivity agreement with Sony Interactive Entertainment, all DLCs for Watch Dogs 2 were timed exclusives for PlayStation 4.55

Root Access Bundle available in December 201656 and Psychedelic Pack available on launch day feature a Zodiac Killer mission as well as new outfits, cars, skins, and weapons.5354
The TBone Content Bundle was released for PlayStation 4 on 22 December 2016,57 and includes a new coop difficulty setting, Mayhem, plus the clothes and truck of the original Watch Dogs character Raymond TBone Kenney.5354
Human Conditions was released on 21 February 2017 for the PlayStation 4 and on 23 March for the Xbox One and PC,58 and includes three new stories set in San Franciscos science and medicine industries. The pack also includes new coop missions featuring a new enemy class called the Jammer, a technologically savvy enemy capable of jamming all of a players hacker equipment, making them vulnerable to headon attacks.5354
No Compromise was released on 18 April 2017 for PlayStation 4 and was launched on 18 May for Xbox One and Microsoft Windows, featuring a new story mission, outfits and weapons.59
Reception
Critical response
Reception
Aggregate score
AggregatorScore
MetacriticPC 7510060
PS4 8210061
XONE 8110062
Review scores
PublicationScore
Destructoid8.51063
EGM81064
Game Informer7.751065
Game Revolution4.55 stars66
IGN8.51067
Polygon81068
VideoGamer.com81069
Watch Dogs 2 received generally favorable reviews from critics, according to review aggregator Metacritic.606162 Technical issues on consoles were fixed with the Update 1.04 patch.70

In his review, Destructoids Zack Furniss praised the sequels tonal shift to a lack of seriousness and stated that its protagonist Marcus Holloway boasted a similar charm and wit. He thought well of the hacking component as it was suggestible to multiple fields of use, and enjoyed its nature of compatibility with a nonlethal approach; in fact, Furniss felt that for this reason firearms could have been excluded entirely. The driving was lauded as an improvement from the first game, yet technical issues like glitches and low frame rates were cited as shortcomings.63 To Matt Buchholtz, writing for EGM, the game signified less a hacktivist tale and more a beautiful immersion into the San Francisco Bay. The setting, characters and story were cited as considerable refinements from its predecessor. Buchholtz discerned that the tasks demanded to gain followers were successful in encouraging world exploration. He noted however that  in context of the main character  murder made little sense, which led to increased usage of stealth.64 Elise Favis at Game Informer both disparaged and praised elements in comparison to those of Watch Dogs. She enjoyed that hacking was prioritized in the gameplay and the new smoother driving mechanic, but saw inconsistencies in the protagonists actions versus his personality and thought supporting characters too obnoxious and petty to be meaningful companions. Favis also experienced low frame rate capabilities on PlayStation 4.65

Aron Garst of Game Revolution stated that Watch Dogs 2 had redressed nearly every negative aspect of the original, and as such, marked a favorable change in the franchise.66 IGNs Dan Stapleton liked Marcus Holloway more than Aiden Pearce of the first game, and similarly appreciated the supporting characters of DedSec. Marcus penchant for moral integrity was a noticeable contradiction for Stapleton, though, in light of the prospect to have him kill innocent people if one so chooses. Therefore, the characters personality was observed as the only preclusion to violence and an axiomatic push toward the stealth approach, which Stapleton insisted was the most accommodating of available tools.71 Writing for Polygon, Philip Kollar saw that Watch Dogs 2 could appeal to those able to connect with being young, angry at the system and certain that you know whats best for the world. Its tongueincheek demeanor was said to naturally coincide with the hacker culture and open world genre. San Francisco  the spaces of which were described as cleverly designed  never felt overwhelming in size to Kollar but inspired joy as he took advantage of the immediate ability to explore it entirely. His complaints concerned firearms; their use was considered a complete failure of imagination and unbelievable from the members of DedSec  an Anonymousesque group of peaceful hacktivists.68 Alice Bell of VideoGamer.com wrote in her verdict, Watch Dogs 2 is missing a bit of refinement, and has had issues with multiplayer, but joining DedSec is still a riot and a half. Its high energy fun with engaging characters, and you can make an entire city your playground.69

Sales
In November 2016, Ubisoft revealed that the games preorders were disappointing for the company. Due to this, Ubisoft took a more conservative approach and reduced the sales projection for the second half of its fiscal year 2017. However, CEO Yves Guillemot was confident that the game would not be a commercial failure, and compared the game to Far Cry 3, a commercially successful game with low preorder sales. He believed that reviews would have a great impact to the game sales due to consumers waitandsee approach.7273

Watch Dogs 2 was the second bestselling retail video game in the United Kingdom in its week of release, according to ChartTrack, an eighty percent decrease from the sales of the original.7475 In the United States, the game ranked number eight in sales in January 2017.76 The PlayStation 4 version sold 68,796 copies in Japan.77

Notes
 Additional work by Ubisoft Paris, Ubisoft Toronto, Ubisoft Bucharest, and Ubisoft Reflections.
 Can be purchased separately
 Included in all editions when preordered
References
 Davenport, James 6 December 2016. Watch Dogs 2 review. PC Gamer. Future US. Archived from the original on 7 June 2017.
 Varanini, Giancarlo 8 June 2016. Watch Dogs 2 Reveal  Heres What You Need to Know about ctOS Bay Area Invasion. Ubisoft. Archived from the original on 7 June 2017.
 Ubisoft Montreal 15 November 2016. Watch Dogs 2. PlayStation 4, Xbox One, Microsoft Windows. Ubisoft.
 Musa, Talal 14 July 2016. Watch Dogs 2 exclusive: Ubisoft reveals new information about antihero Marcus Holloway. London Evening Standard. Archived from the original on 24 November 2016.
 Nunneley, Stephany 8 June 2016. Watch Dogs 2 stars a hacker named Marcus accused of a crime he didnt commit. VG247. Videogaming247. Archived from the original on 9 June 2016.
 Phillips, Tom 8 June 2016. Everything we know about Watch Dogs 2. Eurogamer. Gamer Network. Archived from the original on 9 June 2016.
 Williams, Mike 6 August 2016. Watch Dogs 2 Brings the Revolution to San Francisco. USgamer. Gamer Network. Archived from the original on 9 June 2016.
 Favis, Elise 8 June 2016. Six Ways Watch Dogs 2 Is Different From Its Predecessor. Game Informer. GameStop. Archived from the original on 9 June 2016.
 McWhertor, Michael 8 June 2016. Watch Dogs 2 has a new hacker hero, a new city and a whole lot more. Polygon. Vox Media. Archived from the original on 8 June 2016.
 Bell, Alice 23 June 2016. Everything We Know About Watch Dogs 2. VideoGamer.com. Resero Network. Archived from the original on 6 June 2017.
 Orry, James 17 August 2016. Ubisoft made a lot of announcements at Gamescom, some of which youll be interested in. VideoGamer.com. Resero Network. Archived from the original on 22 October 2016.
 Martin, Liam 13 June 2016. Updated: Watch Dogs 2 release date, trailer, story, system requirements and everything you need to know about Ubisofts game. Digital Spy. Hearst Magazines UK. Archived from the original on 19 June 2016.
 Butterworth, Scott 14 June 2016. Watch Dogs 2 Embraces Its Inner Grand Theft Auto. GameSpot. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on 24 November 2016.
 Prell, Sam 29 August 2016. Take a 20minute tour of Watch Dogs 2s open world. GamesRadar. Future Publishing. Archived from the original on 24 November 2016.
 Mahardy, Mike 8 June 2016. Watch Dogs 2 Details Officially Revealed. GameSpot. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on 9 June 2016.
 Alexander, Julia 17 August 2016. Ubisoft reveals two online multiplayer modes for Watch Dogs 2. Polygon. Vox Media. Archived from the original on 17 August 2016.
 Blain, Louise 17 August 2016. Watch Dogs 2s Bounty Hunter mode will send online players to kill you. GamesRadar. Future Publishing. Archived from the original on 24 November 2016.
 Carsillo, Ray 17 August 2016. Watch Dogs 2s Bounty Hunter mode is the latest way to invade your friends game. Electronic Gaming Monthly. EGM Media. Archived from the original on 24 November 2016.
 Watch Dogs 2 Brings EKart, Motocross, and Drone Races to Multiplayer  IGN Video. IGN. 13 April 2017.
 Makuch, Eddie 22 September 2014. E3 2014: Ubisoft Says Watch Dogs Is a Franchise  Now We Figure Out What To Do Next. GameSpot. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on 8 October 2014.
 Watch Dogs 2 will carry on taking risks says Ubisoft. GamesTM. Future Publishing. Archived from the original on 17 January 2015.
 van der Linde, Damon 8 June 2016. Ubisofts Watch Dogs 2 looks at the sunnier side of Big Brother. National Post. Postmedia Network. Archived from the original on 9 June 2017.
 Chalk, Andy 30 August 2016. Watch Dogs 2 gameplay video features hacking, driving, and bounties. PC Gamer. Future US. Archived from the original on 24 November 2016.
 Morris, Tatiana 14 July 2016. Watch Dogs 2 shouldnt see same downgrade as original, due to more predictable context. GameZone. GameZone Next. Archived from the original on 24 November 2016.
 McKeand, Kirk 24 October 2016. Watch Dogs 2s politically charged selfawareness looks set to surprise. The Daily Telegraph. Telegraph Media Group. Archived from the original on 24 November 2016.
 Reparaz, Mikel 24 October 2016. Watch Dogs 2  10 Things We Learned From the First 4 Hours. Ubisoft. Archived from the original on 24 November 2016.
 Reparaz, Mikel 10 August 2016. Watch Dogs 2  Remote Access: How Hacker Culture Helped Create DedSec. Ubisoft. Archived from the original on 22 October 2016.
 Heine, Christopher 3 November 2016. Ubisoft Wants Gamers to Learn What Data a Hacker Can Steal From Their Selfies. Adweek. Archived from the original on 24 November 2016.
 Takahashi, Dean 26 October 2016. Ubisoft researcher scouted Watch Dogs 2 by hanging out with hacktivists in SF and DefCon. GamesBeat. Archived from the original on 24 November 2016.
 Valdes, Giancarlo 17 July 2016. Watch Dogs 2s San Francisco brings out the playful side of the hacking series. GamesBeat. Archived from the original on 22 October 2016.
 Phillips, Tom 22 June 2016. Watch Dogs 2: There are no towers. Eurogamer. Gamer Network. Archived from the original on 22 October 2016.
 Takahashi, Dean 25 October 2016. Why Watch Dogs 2 creators chose to focus on San Franciscos hacktivism. GamesBeat. Archived from the original on 24 November 2016.
 Makuch, Eddie 26 October 2016. Kanye West Collaborator Working on Watch Dogs 2s Soundtrack, Listen to First Song Here. GameSpot. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on 24 November 2016.
 Wright, James 8 November 2016. Watch Dogs 2 teams up with Google and DJ Oliver Heldens for exclusive new track Good Life. Daily Star. Northern  Shell Media. Archived from the original on 24 November 2016.
 Ded Sec  Watch Dogs 2 OST. Warp. 25 October 2016. Archived from the original on 7 June 2017.
 Chalk, Andy 12 February 2016. Watch Dogs 2 confirmed, due out before April 2017. PC Gamer. Future US. Archived from the original on 9 June 2016.
 Phillips, Tom 4 May 2016. It looks like a mocap actor has revealed Watch Dogs 2s new protagonist. Eurogamer. Gamer Network. Archived from the original on 9 June 2016.
 Grant, Christopher 8 June 2016. Heres the Watch Dogs 2 world premiere. Polygon. Vox Media.
 Makuch, Eddie 27 October 2016. Watch Dogs 2 Release Date Draws Near as Game Goes Gold. GameSpot. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on 24 November 2016.
 Orry, James 9 June 2016. Watch Dogs 2s six editions detailed. VideoGamer.com. Resero Network. Archived from the original on 2 August 2016.
 Figueroa, Jovi 11 September 2016. PlayStation 4 Pro Already Set with Four Ubisoft Titles. Inquisitr. Archived from the original on 24 November 2016.
 Orry, James 20 October 2016. Watch Dogs 2 delayed on PC, but are the extra features worth the wait?. VideoGamer.com. Resero Network. Archived from the original on 14 November 2016.
 Edge 295. Edge. Front cover: Future Publishing. August 2016.
 Lilly, Paul 1 November 2016. Samsung teams with Ubisoft to give away Watch Dogs 2 with select SSDs and monitors. PC Gamer. Future US. Archived from the original on 2 November 2016.
 Purchese, Robert 12 November 2016. Watch Dogs 2 copies arriving early and seamless multiplayer doesnt work. Eurogamer. Gamer Network. Archived from the original on 12 November 2016.
 Schreier, Jason 15 November 2016. Watch Dogs 2 Multiplayer Is Broken, Wont Be Fully Live At Launch. Kotaku. Gizmodo Media Group. Archived from the original on 7 June 2017.
 Machkovech, Sam 22 November 2016. Ubisoft drops ball yet again with major online issues in Watch Dogs 2. Ars Technica. Cond Nast. Archived from the original on 23 November 2016.
 Reparaz, Mikel 17 January 2017. Watch Dogs 2  Play the Free Trial. Ubisoft. Archived from the original on 7 June 2017.
 Hall, Charlie 9 June 2016. Watch Dogs 2 preorders come with an actual robot and free serial killer. Polygon. Vox Media. Archived from the original on 9 June 2016.
 McWhertor, Michael 20 October 2016. Get a preview of Watch Dogs 2s Zodiac Killer mission. Polygon. Vox Media. Archived from the original on 21 October 2016.
 Pereira, Chris 28 October 2016. Amazon Primes Free Games and DLC for November 2016. GameSpot. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on 24 November 2016.
 Miller, Daniel R. 11 January 2017. Watch Dogs 2 preorder incentive mission is now free to play for all PS4 players. GameZone. GameZone Next. Archived from the original on 7 June 2017.
 Varanini, Giancarlo 2 November 2016. Watch Dogs 2 Season Pass Detailed. Ubisoft. Archived from the original on 24 November 2016.
 Conditt, Jessica 3 November 2016. The 40 Watch Dogs 2 Season Pass includes new stories, clothes. Engadget. AOL Tech. Archived from the original on 24 November 2016.
 Kuchera, Ben 13 June 2016. Watch Dogs 2 DLC to be exclusive to PlayStation 4 for 30 days. Polygon. Vox Media. Archived from the original on 13 June 2016.
 Shive, Chris 8 December 2016. Watch Dogs 2 Root Access Bundle Available Now. Hardcore Gamer. Archived from the original on 7 June 2017.
 Pereira, Chris 9 December 2016. Watch Dogs 2s First DLC Pushed Back Due to Time Spent on Patches. GameSpot. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on 7 June 2017.
 Nunneley, Stephany 17 February 2017. Watch Dogs 2 Human Conditions DLC adds five hours of content, video takes a look at two new missions. VG247. Videogaming247. Archived from the original on 7 June 2017.
 Watters, Chris 18 April 2017. Watch Dogs 2 No Compromise DLC Available Now on PS4. Ubisoft. Archived from the original on 7 June 2017.
 Watch Dogs 2 Critic Reviews for PC. Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on 7 June 2017.
 Watch Dogs 2 Critic Reviews for PlayStation 4. Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on 7 June 2017.
 Watch Dogs 2 Critic Reviews for Xbox One. Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on 7 June 2017.
 Furniss, Zack 14 November 2016. Review: Watch Dogs 2. Destructoid. ModernMethod. Archived from the original on 14 November 2016.
 Buchholtz, Matt 18 November 2016. Watch Dogs 2 review. Electronic Gaming Monthly. EGM Media. Archived from the original on 7 June 2017.
 Favis, Elise 16 November 2016. A Hackers Playground  Watch Dogs 2  PlayStation 4. Game Informer. GameStop. Archived from the original on 7 June 2017.
 Garst, Aron 14 November 2016. Watch Dogs 2 Review. Game Revolution. CraveOnline. Archived from the original on 7 June 2017.
 Stapleton, Dan 23 November 2016. Watch Dogs 2 Review. IGN. IGN Entertainment. Archived from the original on 7 June 2017.
 Kollar, Philip 14 November 2016. Watch Dogs 2 review. Polygon. Vox Media. Archived from the original on 14 November 2016.
 Bell, Alice 18 November 2016. Watch Dogs 2 review. VideoGamer.com. Resero Network. Archived from the original on 7 June 2017.
 Nunneley, Stephany 19 November 2016. Watch Dogs 2 patch fixes bugs, performance issues, explicit NPC  seamless online update still in the works. VG247. Videogaming247. Archived from the original on 7 June 2017.
 Stapleton, Dan 23 November 2016. Watch Dogs 2 Review. IGN. IGN Entertainment. Archived from the original on 7 June 2017.
 G. Macy, Seth 3 November 2016. Watch Dogs 2 Preorder Below Ubisofts Expectations. IGN. Archived from the original on 6 November 2016.
 Grubb, Jeff 3 November 2016. Ubisoft grows thanks to The Division and digital sales, but Watch Dogs 2 preorders hurt guidance. GamesBeat. Archived from the original on 5 November 2016.
 Arif, Shabana 21 November 2016. Watch Dogs 2 fails to top UK charts in its debut week with drastic drop in sales from the prequel. VG247. Videogaming247. Archived from the original on 21 November 2016.
 Dring, Christopher 21 November 2016. Call of Duty holds No.1 as Watch Dogs 2 launch sales fall 80 over the original. GamesIndustry.biz. Gamer Network. Archived from the original on 21 November 2016.
 Macy, Seth G. 16 February 2017. Resident Evil 7 Was the BestSelling Game of January 2017. IGN. IGN Entertainment. Archived from the original on 7 June 2017.
 This Week In Sales: Yokai Watch 3 Cooks Up Its Sukiyaki Version. Siliconera. 23 December 2016. Archived from the original on 17 January 2018.
External links
Official website
Categories: 2016 video gamesActionadventure gamesAsymmetrical multiplayer video gamesCameras in fictionCybernetted society in fictionCyberpunk video gamesHacking video gamesOpen world video gamesMass surveillance in fictionMultiplayer and singleplayer video gamesParkour video gamesPlayStation 4 gamesPlayStation 4 Pro enhanced gamesPostcyberpunkStealth video gamesUbisoft gamesVideo games developed in CanadaVideo games developed in FranceVideo games developed in RomaniaVideo games developed in the United KingdomVideo games set in San FranciscoVideo game sequelsVideo games with downloadable contentWindows gamesXbox One gamesVideo games using Havok

Tom Clancys The Division
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
Tom Clancys The Division
The Division box.jpg
DevelopersMassive Entertainmenta
PublishersUbisoft
DirectorsMagnus Jansn
Julian Gerigh
ProducersPetter Sydow
DesignersMatthias Karlson
ComposersOla Strandh1
SeriesTom Clancys
EngineSnowdrop
PlatformsMicrosoft Windows
PlayStation 4
Xbox One
Release8 March 20162
GenresAction roleplaying, survival
ModesMultiplayer
Tom Clancys The Division is an action roleplaying video game developed by Massive Entertainment and published by Ubisoft, with assistance from Red Storm Entertainment and Ubisoft Annecy, for Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 4 and Xbox One. It was announced during Ubisofts E3 2013 press conference, and was released worldwide on 8 March 2016. It is set in a near future New York City in the aftermath of a smallpox pandemic; the player, who is a Special Agent of the eponymous Strategic Homeland Division, commonly referred to simply as Division, is tasked with helping the group rebuild its operations in Manhattan, investigate the nature of the outbreak, and combating criminal activity in its wake. The Division is structured with elements of roleplaying games, as well as cooperative and player versus player online multiplayer.

The game received generally positive reviews, and was a commercial success, with Ubisoft stating that the game broke the companys record for highest number of firstday sales. Furthermore, one week after the games release, Ubisoft stated that The Division was the companys bestselling game, and the industrys biggest firstweek launch for a new game franchise, which generated an estimated amount of 330 million globally. A sequel, Tom Clancys The Division 2, is scheduled to be released in March 2019.


Contents
1Gameplay
2Plot
3Development
3.1Postrelease content
4Reception
4.1Reviews
4.2Sales
5Film adaptation
6Sequel
7Notes
8References
9External links
Gameplay

Players may take cover behind objects during firefights to avoid taking damage from enemies, and to give them a tactical advantage when attacking.
Tom Clancys The Division is an action roleplaying game set in an open world midcrisis Manhattan with destructible environments that can be freely explored by the players. The players mission is to restore order by investigating the source of a virus. The player character can carry three weapons, and explosives like sticky bombs and seeker mines to fight against enemies.3 Players may take cover behind objects during firefights to avoid taking damage from enemies, and to give them a tactical advantage when attacking. The game is played from a thirdperson perspective, meaning the character model is visible.4

As players progress, they earn experience points commonly known as XP and currency. They can use this currency to buy weapons and gear, and use the points to learn new talents and skills. The players gear is categorized into seven levels: worn, standard, specialized, superior, highend, gear set items or the rarer exotic items, each with a specific color code. Gear can be either bought, or found as ingame loot, or crafted from gathered materials. The storyline missions involve objectives that are relevant to their respective wing of the Base of Operations, which serves as the players home base. At the players home base there are three wings which are the Medical, Security and Tech wing. Playing missions for a wing grants the player points for that wing which the player can spend to gain access to new talents, perks and facilities in the Base of Operations. The player will receive intel videos from each head of the wing at certain progression points, which the player can watch. The intel received is specific to its wing, with the Medical wing giving virus reports on the outbreak, the Security wing giving insight into each ingame enemy faction and the tech wing providing camera footage.5 The game features a dynamic, timebased weather system which may bring benefits or disadvantages to players. For instance, storms can hinder players visibility and make aiming difficult. The game also features a daynight cycle which can change the behaviour of enemies in the game.6

The Dark Zone is the playerversusplayer competitive multiplayer mode featured in The Division, where a lot of highend weapons are left behind when the military retreats in the game. It is separated from the main campaign and has its own progression system. Higher quality items can be found within the Dark Zone, but are considered contaminated; contaminated loot can be stolen by other players, and must be flown out via helicopter in order for them to be available to the player after they leave the Dark Zone.7 Players can be accompanied by several cooperative partners and other neutral, playercontrolled agents. These people, however, can turn against the player at any moment, going rogue. Players level and ranking may drop if they die too often in the zone.5

Plot
On Black Friday 2015, a smallpox pandemic, transmitted by a virus planted on banknotes, sweeps through New York City. The disease, known as Green Poison or The Dollar Flu, causes widespread chaos, and Manhattan is placed under quarantine. The U.S. Government activates sleeper agents in the population who operate for the Strategic Homeland Division, or simply The Division, to assist emergency responders, now called the Joint Task Force JTF, in restoring order. In Brooklyn, the protagonist, a Division agent, assists the JTF before planning to depart for the Quarantine zone with fellow agent Faye Lau. However, the VTOL meant to take them there is destroyed in an explosion, killing the Division Commander along with most of the second wave and severely wounding Faye Lau. Arriving in a JTFcommandeered news helicopter instead, the Division agents reclaim the James A. Farley Post Office Building as their base of operations. From there, the agents undertake assignments to rescue important personnel, help in restoring the base of operations to full working capacity and combat criminal groups, such as the Rioters, common street thugs in New York who generally want to take advantage of the quarantine, the Rikers, escapees from Rikers Island, and the Cleaners, insane New York Sanitation workers who wield flamethrowers and believe everyone is infected. In the course of the game, the agent helps rescue important personnel like Dr. Jessica Kandel, Captain Roy Benitez and Paul Rhodes. These personnel head the Medical, Security and Tech wings of the base of operations respectively. Agents also recover a sample of Green Poison. Studying the sample reveals the virus was manufactured and then modified heavily by a controversial biologist named Dr. Gordon Amherst.

Eventually, the agents find footage of Division agent Aaron Keener going rogue and killing other agents, having gone insane after witnessing the chaos and destruction caused during the breakdown of order following the initial outbreak. It is also discovered Keener and the rest of the first wave of agents who went rogue along with him are assisting the Last Man Battalion LMB, an equally rogue private military company that was abandoned by the government during the evacuation, and are now hostile to it. Working together, these two groups destroyed the VTOL and killed the Commander to weaken Division operations in New York. Intercepting a signal from the Russian consulate, the agents attempt to rescue Vitaly Tchernenko, a Russian virologist who claims to have information on the Green Poison. However, he is kidnapped by Keener and the LMB before the Division can reach him. After helping the JTF secure supplies and weapons, the JTF and Division agents launch an attack on the LMBs base, the evacuated United Nations headquarters. The agent finds footage of Keener and his fellow rogue agents abandoning the LMB, with Tchernenko as their prisoner. The leader of the LMB, Charles Bliss, initially escapes in a helicopter, but then returns to make a final stand alongside his men. In the end, the agent destroys the vehicle, killing Bliss. Lau informs the agent that most threats are destroyed or weakened, however the LMB was split into factions. New York is approaching stability, but an unknown signal leads the agent to a secluded laboratory. There, they find Dr. Amhersts remains, having discovered that he has died from exposure to his own virus. They also find a message from Keener, showing he has the technology to manufacture a new strain of Green Poison and intends to do so, and mysteriously tells the agent to explore the center of Manhattan, called the Dark Zone. The agent is informed that the information in the lab will further the development of a vaccine and is shown a recovered message from Amherst. In the message, Amherst reveals he engineered Green Poison as part of his ecoterrorist plan to decimate the human race and preserve the planet. If the player follows Keeners instructions, they will discover a message from Keener claiming that he plans to continue with Amhersts plot, as he has come to worship the virus as the judge of all humanity and plans to reverse engineer and improve it; he then offers the player a position beside him based on their actions in the Dark Zone.

Development
Tom Clancys The Division was originally being developed as an eighth generation consoles exclusive.8 Shortly after the games unveiling, Ubisoft stated that other platforms were not ruled out.9 Ubisoft asked PC gamers to show interest in the game by signing petitions, and then they would decide. The new intellectual property and tech has been in development for several years although development on the actual game began in early 2013.1011

During E3 2013, the game was officially announced,1213 with a trailer explaining the results of Operation Dark Winter and the purpose of Directive 51. During the Expo, Ubisoft announced a companion app that allows players to play the game on tablets. Players are able to join in the game as a drone to offer tactical support for players playing on PC and consoles.14 On 20 August 2013, Ubisoft announced that the game would be released for PC on Microsoft Windows as a result of the vocal and passionate PC community.15 On 7 February 2014, Ubisoft announced that Ubisoft Reflections was codeveloping the game and was responsible for developing the mapdesign, characterdesign and the online components of the game.16 Red Storm Entertainment, a subsidiary of Ubisoft that was cofounded by Tom Clancy, was also working on the weapondesign of the game.17 Ubisoft Annecy was also announced to be one of the codevelopers of the game on 8 May 2015.18

On 15 May 2014, it was announced that The Division would be delayed until 2015, according to an anonymous source inside Massive Entertainment studio. The Division uses Ubisofts new proprietary engine known as Snowdrop, which is made for PC, PlayStation 4 and Xbox One.19 On 9 June 2014, The Division was showcased at E3 2014 with an anticipated release for late 2015.20 In February 2016, Ubisoft announced that downloadable content for The Division would be timed exclusives for Xbox One.21

During E3 2015, the games final release date and a player versus player area known as the Dark Zone were revealed.22 Its companion app was cancelled, as the company considered that the addition of drones will bring unfairness to the competitive multiplayer mode of the game.23 Unlike the previous E3 demo, Long Island, and Staten Island do not appear in the game at launch, while Brooklyn only appears in the opening hours of the game as the tutorial area. The beta was set to be released for the Xbox One in December 2015 and for Windows and PlayStation 4 in 2016.24 On 7 December 2015, Ubisoft announced that The Divisions beta would be moved to early 2016 and that an Xbox One exclusive alpha would begin on 9 December 2015.

On 26 January 2016, it was confirmed that the closed Beta would begin on 28 January 2016 for Xbox One and 29 January 2016 for PlayStation 4 and Microsoft Windows,25 and end, for all platforms, on 1 February 2016. On 31 January 2016, Ubisoft announced that they had extended the beta, and that it would end on 2 February 2016.26

On 9 February 2016, Ubisoft announced that The Divisions open beta would begin for Xbox One on 18 February 2016, and for PC and PlayStation 4 on 19 February 2016, and would end for all platforms on 22 February 2016.27 Over 6.4 million players, across all platforms, participated in the open beta. On 27 February 2016, Ubisoft confirmed that there would be no microtransactions at launch. The Division was released on 8 March 2016, two years after its initially planned release.28

There was a promotional short film released on Amazon prime titled The Division: Agent Origins29

Postrelease content
The game is supported by additional content, such as daily and weekly missions, Dark Zone missions and free updates, after the games launch. The April update, Incursions introduces new gadgets, a new area called Falcon Lost and updated AI to the game,.30 The May update, named Conflict, adds Dark Zone Extraction Hijacking and the new Incursion  Clear Sky, which was released. The game was announced to be supported by 3 paid expansions. In June, Underground, which includes missions set in tunnels and subways, was released. It was reported that it would be followed by Survival, which adds the Survival game mode. Last Stand was set to be released in the last quarter of the year.31

Survival and Last Stand were delayed to late 2016 and early 2017 respectively, so that Ubisoft can focus its effort into fixing the core games issues, such as balancing and bugs.32 Survival was available on all platforms by December.33 Last Stand was released on 28 February 2017.34

Ubisoft in March 2017 revealed plans for a second year of additional content with two free expansions.35 Update 1.7 was released on 15 August including additional features and tweaks. The update added Global Events, limitedtime events with gameplay modifiers that give special rewards. In addition, it also adds the ability to customize a characters face, cosmetic items as well as Commendations which replaces Feats.36

Update 1.8 was released on 5 December 2017. It adds a new area called West Side Pier as well as two new games modes called Resistance and Skirmish. In Resistance, the player has to fend off waves of enemies. Skirmish is a multiplayer mode where teams of four players have to achieve the highest killcount.37

Reception
Reviews
Reception
Aggregate score
AggregatorScore
MetacriticPS4 8010038
XONE 8010039
PC 7910040
Review scores
PublicationScore
Destructoid6.51041
EGM91042
Game Informer81043
Game Revolution3.55 stars45
GameSpot81044
GamesRadar45 stars46
Giant Bomb45 stars47
IGN6.71048
PC Gamer US6810049
Polygon71050
VideoGamer.com81051
Tom Clancys The Division received generally favourable reviews according to review aggregator, Metacritic. Ars Technica drew comparisons between The Division and Destiny, a firstperson shooter game with similar overall mechanics regarding items, crafting, and shared world elements. The game was also compared to modern massively multiplayer online roleplaying games MMORPG, explaining that structurally, it all feels like it could have been ripped from Guild Wars 2 or a latterday World of Warcraft, including that old MMO staple of being stuck in a server queue before diving into a game onlaunch, in combination with the quintessential Ubisoft design style of varying types of collectible and upgrade systems. The Division was criticized for lacking variety in its activities and missions, explaining that it does little to break from or advance what is fast becoming the general form of the loot shooter genre. In fact, it takes very few risks at all, particularly with its enemies and encounter design. The Dark Zone was described as being harrowing, but was panned for sharing characteristics with the postgame content of Destiny, as being the only means of obtaining higherlevel gear that is, ultimately, only theoretically needed for further play in the Dark Zone, and for not introducing any major differences in gameplay mechanics like the raids of Destiny.52

Vince Ingenito of IGN was more critical of The Division, outlining that next to every good thing The Division does, there hangs a big, ugly asterisk. The overall atmosphere was panned for being barren and unengaging overall; as examples, Ingenito focused upon the lack of dynamic events in the game world, that there were long stretches of eventless walking where very little happens due to the lack of events and encounters, the lack of variety in missions and activities, and that the grid layout of Manhattan made navigation and exploration tedious. The gun mechanics of The Division were described as being standard and more in line with the more realistic feel of other Tom Clancybranded games, with guns that had distinct feels due to their varying statistics, and that the fact that the action leans so heavily on smart tactics makes it rewarding when the last foe in a pack finally goes down. 48

The progression system was also criticized for being fractured, requiring that players visit multiple locations with different systems in order to upgrade their abilities, explaining that its hard to accurately gauge just how strong you really are, and as a result, easy to get in over your head in a mission that your character level indicates you can handle. While noting that its postgame content was mainly limited to harder versions of story missions with stronger bullet sponge enemies, Ingenito praised the Dark Zone for fixing just about every problem I have with The Divisions pacing, its lack of playerdriven moments, and the overall toothlessness and emptiness of its open world, by adding an omnipresent danger and a higher degree of risk to player interactions. In conclusion, Ingenito felt that the games ideas and mechanics were not spread evenly or interwoven cleanly enough to form a cohesive, consistently enjoyable loop.48

Prior to version 1.0.2 of the game, named enemy NPCs would respawn indefinitely, as long as their entourage of minions were never killed. This allowed players to collect the named enemies superior and highend loot over and over again. The most popular target of this exploit was a character known as the Bullet King, as this character was the named enemy closest to any player spawn point in the game.53545556 The glitch has been resolved in patch 1.0.2 of the game,57 released by Ubisoft on March 22, 2016.

Sales
According to Ubisoft, the game broke company records, including highest number of firstday sales58 breaking the record previously set by Watch Dogs in 2014, and becoming the companys bestselling game. The Division also broke the industry record for biggest firstweek launch for a new game franchise, generating an estimated amount of 330 million globally.59 The retail version of The Division was the best selling game in its week of release in the U.K. and Ireland, debuting at No. 1 in the UK retail software sales chart. The games launch marked the biggest video game debut in the first quarter of the year in the U.K., breaking the record previously held by Sonys Gran Turismo 4. It was the third biggest launch of a Ubisoft game in the U.K., behind Assassins Creed III and Watch Dogs.60 The game has the highest week one sales for a new intellectual property, breaking the record held by Destiny.61 The game was No. 1 in Japan, selling over 80,000 units in its first week.62 The NPD Group indicated that the retail version of The Division was the best selling game in March 2016 in the U.S.63

Film adaptation
In June of 2016, it was announced that a live action feature film adaption of The Division is in development, with Jake Gyllenhaal in the starring role. Gyllenhaal will coproduce the film with CEO of Ubisoft, Gerard Guillemot.64 By August of the same year, Jessica Chastain was cast in the costarring role of the film.65

By January 2017, Stephen Gaghan was attached to direct,66 though he left the project in 2018. In April of 2018, David Leitch signed on to directcoproduce the film. Kelly McCormick, Gyllenhaal, Riva Marker, Chastain and Kelly Carmichael will coproduce.67

Sequel
On 9 March 2018, a sequel to the game, Tom Clancys The Division 2, was announced, that was currently being worked on by Massive Entertainment.6869 The game was officially premiered at the Electronic Entertainment Expo 2018 in June 2018.6970 On June 10, 2018, Tom Clancys The Division 2 was announced to be released on 15 March 2019,69 with the game set to take place within Washington D.C. after it falls into anarchy, and six months after the events of Tom Clancys The Division.71

Notes
 Additional work by Ubisoft Reflections, Red Storm Entertainment Ubisoft Annecy and Ubisoft Leamington
References
 Greening, Chris. The Division composed by Ubisoft Massive inhouse musician. Game Music Online. Retrieved 11 June 2014.
 Pereira, Chris 12 May 2015. The Division Delayed, Now Slated for Early 2016 Release. GameSpot. Retrieved 12 May 2015.
 Roberts, Samuel 15 June 2015. The Division preview: playing PvP in the lawless Dark Zone. PC Gamer. Retrieved 26 November 2015.
 Gies, Arthur 23 June 2015. The Division has promise  if you can keep from shooting the wrong people. Polygon. Retrieved 26 November 2015.
 Sheridan, Connor 26 November 2015. The Divisions character progression sure sounds like an MMO. GamesRadar. Retrieved 26 November 2015.
 Nunneley, Stephany 23 October 2015. The Division  more on how dynamic weather and lighting can affect gameplay. VG247. Retrieved 26 November 2015.
 Makuch, Eddie 27 February 2015. The Divisions PvP Dark Zones Detailed. GameSpot. Retrieved 26 November 2015.
 The Division homepage. Ubisoft. Retrieved 20 August 2013.
 Tweet about other platforms. Twitter. Retrieved 12 June 2013.
 Papadopoulos, John 14 June 2014. Ubisoft asks PC gamers to show interest about The Division, petition almost hits its initial goal. DSOGaming. Retrieved 14 June 2014.
 Savage, Phil 17 June 2013. The Division: Ubisoft encourages players to sign PC petition  over 50,000 do. PC Gamer. Retrieved 13 May 2014.
 Goldfarb, Andrew 10 June 2013. E3 2013: Open World Tom Clancy RPG The Division Announced. IGN. Retrieved 20 August 2013.
 LeJacq, Yannick 10 June 2013. Ubisoft unveils Tom Clancy game The Division. NBC News. Retrieved 10 June 2013.
 Tom Clancys The Division to let mobile players get in on postapocalyptic console action. Polygon. 10 June 2013. Retrieved 20 August 2013.
 Pitcher, Jenna 20 August 2013. The Division confirmed for Windows PC. iMore. Retrieved 20 August 2013.
 Sarkar, Samit 7 February 2014. The Division being codeveloped by Ubisoft Reflections and Massive. Polygon. Retrieved 7 February 2014.
 Scammell, David 9 April 2014. Red Storm teams up with Ubisoft Massive on The Division. VideoGamer.com. Retrieved 13 May 2014.
 McWhertor, Michael 8 May 2015. Ubisoft brings in another studio to help make Tom Clancys The Division. Polygon. Retrieved 9 May 2015.
 Crecente, Brian 19 May 2014. Heres The Divisions amazing game engine in action. Polygon. Retrieved 26 June 2015.
 Karmali, Luke 15 May 2014. The Division may be Delayed to 2015. IGN. Retrieved 15 May 2014.
 The Divisions DLC will launch as timed Xbox One exclusive. Polygon. Retrieved 17 February 2016.
 Hindes, Daniel 16 June 2015. Forging Fragile Alliances At E3 2015 In The Divisions Dark Zones. GameSpot. Retrieved 16 June 2015.
 Sheridan, Connor 15 June 2015. The Division subtracts its coollooking companion app drone experience. GamesRadar. Retrieved 16 June 2015.
 Krupa, Daniel 15 June 2015. E3 2015: The Division Beta Begins In This Year. IGN. Retrieved 16 June 2015.
 Sheridan, Connor 26 January 2016. Heres exactly when you can start playing The Division beta. GamesRadar. Retrieved 26 January 2016.
 Good, Owen S. 31 January 2016. The Divisions closed beta is extended one day. Polygon. Retrieved 9 February 2016.
 Nunneley, Stephany 9 February 2016. The Division open beta kicks off February 18th, 2016 for Xbox One, February 19th, 2016 for PlayStation 4 and PC. VG247. Retrieved 9 February 2016.
 Villegas, Jackie 23 January 2016. Tom Clancys The Division Release Date, Details: New Video Game Is Compelling And RealerThanReal, Creative Director Says. Christian Post. Retrieved 26 January 2016.
 IMDB Agent Origins.
 Jones, Gary April 1, 2016. The Division Incursions UPDATE: Falcon Lost underground lair and Dark Zone missions reveal. Express.co.uk. Retrieved April 6, 2016.
 Passalacqua, Michael March 3, 2016. The Division DLC Release Windows Announced. IGN. Retrieved April 6, 2016.
 Chalk, Andy August 26, 2016. Ubisoft delays the next two Division expansions to Ubisoft delays the next two Division expansions to focus on fixing the game. PC Gamer. Retrieved August 26, 2016.
 Williatham, Atle December 22, 2016. The Divisions Survival DLC has launched on PlayStation 4. GameZone. Retrieved February 2, 2018.
 Ricchuito, Madelinr February 28, 2017. The Division Got An 8.5GB Update Today Along With DLC And A Free Trial. Bleeding Cool. Retrieved 6 February 2018.
 YinPoole, Wesley March 8, 2017. Theres good news and bad news on The Division year two. Eurogamer. Retrieved 1 March 2018.
 Pereira, Chris 15 August 2017. The Divisions 1.7 Update Out Now, Here Are The Patch Notes. Gamespot. Retrieved 1 March 2018.
 Hester, Blake 5 December 2017. The Division Update 1.8 Adds New Gameplay Modes and Area. Rolling Stone. Retrieved 1 March 2018.
 Tom Clancys The Division for PlayStation 4 Reviews. Metacritic. Retrieved 9 March 2016.
 Tom Clancys The Division for Xbox One Reviews. Metacritic. Retrieved 9 March 2016.
 Tom Clancys The Division for PC Reviews. Metacritic. Retrieved 9 March 2016.
 Carter, Chris 14 March 2016. Review: Tom Clancys The Division. Destructoid. Retrieved 14 March 2016.
 Plessas, Nick 16 March 2016. Tom Clancys The Division review. Electronic Gaming Monthly. Retrieved 16 March 2016.
 Bertz, Matt 15 March 2016. Ubisoft Forges A New Destiny For Online Shooters  The Division  PlayStation 4. Game Informer. Retrieved 15 March 2016.
 Butterworth, Scott 13 March 2016. Tom Clancys The Division Review. GameSpot. Retrieved 13 March 2016.
 Paras, Peter 21 March 2016. Tom Clancys The Division Review. Game Revolution. Retrieved 21 March 2016.
 Hartup, Andy 23 March 2016. Tom Clancys The Division review. GamesRadar. Retrieved 23 March 2016.
 Gerstmann, Jeff 14 March 2016. Tom Clancys The Division Review. Giant Bomb. Retrieved 14 March 2016.
 Ingenito, Vince 16 March 2016. Tom Clancys The Division Review. IGN. Retrieved 16 March 2016.
 Davenport, James 15 March 2016. Tom Clancys The Division review. PC Gamer. Retrieved 15 March 2016.
 Gies, Arthur 15 March 2016. The Division review. Polygon. Retrieved 15 March 2016.
 Bell, Alice 10 March 2016. Tom Clancys The Division Review. VideoGamer.com. Retrieved 10 March 2016.
 The Division review: Mistakes were made, both old and new. Ars Technica. Conde Nast. Retrieved 13 March 2016.
 Heres a Good Way to Farm Items and Phoenix Credits in The Division. Kotaku, March 2016
 Bullet King is The Divisions loot cave. Rock, Paper, Shotgun, 21 March 2016
 The Division dev addressing loot cave with new update. GameSpot
 The Division Phoenix credits farming spot found. Eurogamer. 21 March 2016
 Tom Clancys The Division version 1.0.2 release notes.
 Varanini, Giancarlo 9 March 2016. The Division Breaks Ubisoft Records. Ubiblog. Archived from the original on 18 March 2016. Retrieved 30 April 2016.
 Varanini, Giancarlo 15 March 2016. The Division Has Biggest First Week Ever for New Game Franchise. Ubiblog. Archived from the original on 17 March 2016. Retrieved 30 April 2016.
 Phillips, Tom March 14, 2015. The Division is UKs biggest ever Q1 launch. Eurogamer. Retrieved March 14, 2016.
 Matulef, Jeffery 15 March 2016. The Division claims fastestselling new games IP crown. Eurogamer. Retrieved 16 March 2016.
 Parffit, Ben March 16, 2016. The Division outsells Zelda Twilight Princess in Japan. Market for Home Computing and Video Games. Retrieved March 17, 2016.
 Grubb, Jeff 14 April 2016. March 2016 NPD: Ubisoft, Nintendo shake up sales chart with The Division, Zelda. VentureBeat.
 Kroll, Justin June 1, 2016. Jake Gyllenhaal to Star in Ubisofts The Division Movie EXCLUSIVE. Variety. Retrieved June 2, 2016.
 Nakamura, Reid August 2, 2016. Jessica Chastain Joins Jake Gyllenhaal in Tom Clancy Video Game Adaptation The Division. The Wrap.
 Kroll, Justin January 19, 2017. Stephen Gaghan to Direct The Division Movie Starring Jake Gyllenhaal and Jessica Chastain EXCLUSIVE. Variety.
 Kroll, Justin. Deadpool 2s David Leitch to Direct Jessica Chastain, Jake Gyllenhaal in The Division EXCLUSIVE. Variety. Retrieved 19 April 2018.
 Philips, Tom 8 March 2018. The Division 2 details leak online ahead of announcement. Eurogamer. Gamer Network. Retrieved 14 June 2018.
 Nunneley, Stephen 8 March 2018. The Division 2 is currently in the works at Massive Entertainment, more to come at E3 2018. vg247. Retrieved 18 March 2018.
 Horti, Samuel May 2018. The Division 2 will release within the next 12 months, Ubisoft confirms. PCGamer. Future, Inc. Retrieved 20 May 2018.
 Goslin, Austen; Good, Owen S. 10 June 2018. Tom Clancys The Division 2 launches next March. Polygon. Vox Media, Inc. Retrieved 14 June 2018.
External links
Official website
Tom Clancys The Division on IMDb
vte
Tom Clancys video games
vte
Ubisoft Reflections
Categories: 2016 video gamesBioterrorism in fictionDiseases and disorders in fictionDystopian video gamesPostapocalyptic video gamesMultiplayer video gamesMass murder in fictionOpen world video gamesPlayStation 4 gamesPlayStation 4 Pro enhanced gamesThirdperson shootersTom Clancy gamesUbisoft gamesVideo games developed in SwedenVideo games featuring female antagonistsVideo games set in New York CityVideo games about viral outbreaksVideo games set in the futureVideo games that support DirectX 12Windows gamesXbox One games

Metal Gear Solid V: The Phantom Pain
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
Metal Gear Solid V redirects here. For the prologue, see Metal Gear Solid V: Ground Zeroes.
Metal Gear Solid V: The Phantom Pain
Metal Gear Solid V The Phantom Pain cover.png
DevelopersKojima Productionsa
PublishersKonami Digital Entertainment
DirectorsHideo Kojima
Producers
Hideo Kojima
Kenichiro Imaizumi
Kazuki Muraoka
DesignersHideo Kojima
Programmers
Daizaburo Nakamura
Makoto Sonoyama
Shutaro Iida
Takehiro Nomura
ArtistsYoji Shinkawa
Writers
Hideo Kojima
Shuyo Murata
Hidenari Inamura
Etsu Tamari
Composers
Ludvig Forssell
Justin Burnett
Daniel James
SeriesMetal Gear
EngineFox Engine
Platforms
Microsoft Windows
PlayStation 3
PlayStation 4
Xbox 360
Xbox One
Release
WW: September 1, 2015
JP: September 2, 2015
GenresActionadventure, stealth
ModesSingleplayer, multiplayer
Metal Gear Solid V: The Phantom Painb is an actionadventure stealth game developed by Kojima Productions and published by Konami. It was released worldwide for Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 3, PlayStation 4, Xbox 360 and Xbox One on September 1, 2015. It is the ninth installment in the series that was directed, written and designed by Hideo Kojima following Metal Gear Solid V: Ground Zeroes, a standalone prologue released the previous year, as well as his final work at Konami.

Set in 1984, nine years after the events of Ground Zeroes and a decade before the events of the original Metal Gear, the story follows mercenary leader Punished Venom Snake as he ventures into Sovietoccupied Afghanistan and the AngolaZaire border region to exact revenge on the people who destroyed his forces and came close to killing him during the climax of Ground Zeroes. It carries over the tagline of Tactical Espionage Operations first used in Metal Gear Solid: Peace Walker.

The Phantom Pain was critically acclaimed upon release, with its gameplay drawing praise for featuring a variety of mechanics and interconnected systems which allow a high degree of player freedom in approaching objectives. While the story was acknowledged for its emotional power and exploration of mature themes, it drew criticism from some critics for its lack of focus, with further scrutiny over its second half and ending that left several plot points unresolved; this was linked to conclusive evidence of removed content, which led some to suggest that the game was released unfinished. Despite this, The Phantom Pain received perfect review scores from several publications and was described by some critics to be the greatest stealth game of all time. A complete edition that bundles The Phantom Pain and Ground Zeroes together, titled Metal Gear Solid V: The Definitive Experience, was released in October 2016.


Contents
1Gameplay
1.1Multiplayer
2Plot
2.1Premise
2.2Characters
2.3Synopsis
3Development
3.1Music
3.2Dispute between Konami and Kojima
4Release
5Reception
5.1Critical response
5.2Portrayal of Quiet
5.3Removed content
5.4Sales
5.5Accolades
6Notes
7References
8Further reading
9External links
Gameplay
Metal Gear Solid V: The Phantom Pain is an actionadventure, stealth game in which players take the role of Punished Venom Snake from a thirdperson perspective in an open world environment.1 The gameplay elements were largely unchanged from Ground Zeroes, meaning that players will have to sneak from several points in the game world, avoiding enemy guards, and remaining undetected.2 Included in Snakes repertoire are binoculars, maps, a variety of weapons, explosives, and stealthbased items such as cardboard boxes and decoys.23 Following one of the series traditions, The Phantom Pain encourages players to progress through the game without killing, using nonlethal weapons such as tranquilizer darts to subdue enemies.4 Players may traverse the game world with vehicles such as jeeps and tanks, in addition to traveling on foot or on horseback, and as certain locations are mountainous,5 occasionally, players can opt to go rock climbing as a shortcut.6 They may call for helicopter support against enemy soldiers or request airstrikes that can bomb the target area or change the current weather.7 Snake can call on AI companionsincluding Quiet, a silent female sniper with supernatural abilities; DHorse, a horse with a customizable saddle for carrying more equipment in the field; DWalker, a manned, highly agile mobile weapons platform that can provide heavy weapons support; and DDog, a wolf pup raised and trained on the new Mother Base to assist him in the field.8 The companions abilities and their effectiveness will depend on the players relationship with them.7 There is a large emphasis based on tactics in The Phantom Pain.9

As in Peace Walker, The Phantom Pain features a basebuilding system that allows players to develop weapons and items from their home base.10 Recruitment of enemy soldiers and prisoners has also returned for this purpose, allowing the base to grow through organization. The player is given the option to access their base from their reallife smartphones and other devices via a companion app.11 Unlike in Peace Walker where players can only see Mother Base from the air, they can control Snake as he explores the complex on foot. The Fulton surfacetoair recovery system, an item introduced into gameplay in Peace Walker, returns as well, with players able to transport captured soldiers and other objects such as animals and vehicles back to Mother Base.12 Money for upgrading Mother Bases defenses and technology can be collected from objects found all over the map, such as diamonds, shipping containers, and special blueprint boxes,13 as well as sending recruited soldiers on combat missions around the world. The income is invested in upgrades to the appearance and abilities, weapons and equipment of Snake, his AI companions, and vehicles. For example, Snakes prosthetic arm can be modified with a taser, echolocation function, or remote controls that allow it to fly as a drone.1415

The enemy AI has improved in terms of situational awareness. If players frequently use particular weapons or tactics to subdue enemy soldiers, repeats of the mission will see the enemy increase in numbers and be outfitted with better equipment; for example, the frequent use of headshots will see enemy soldiers don metal helmets to make targeting the head harder.16

The game has a dynamic weather system and daynight cycle that runs in realtime.17 The cycle is able to be fastforwarded when Snake lights a Phantom Cigar, a type of electronic cigar; a digital silver Seiko watch panel appears on screen to denote time.18 The passage of time enables players to analyze the movement of marked enemy forces in the area, such as shifts in sentry patrols and individual patrol routes. Weather effects, such as sandstorms and rain, affects the gameplay environment by reducing visibility or masking the sound of footsteps.19

A game design direction allows the player to choose in what order the story events take place by selecting missions in any order they like, and yet still understand the encompassing message by the end.2021

Kojima spoke about the restrictive nature of previous Metal Gear Solid titles, saying that they set the player on one rail to get from point A to point B, with a certain amount of freedom between. In stark contrast, The Phantom Pain offers players new ways of traversal and sneaking methods, such as taking a motorcycle, plane or helicopter to the mission area however, usage of the former two vehicles was later dropped during development. Players are able to traverse the game world or deploy directly to landing zones that allow for different approaches. A video published after the E3 2015 convention showcased this, with the same mission played four times in a number of different ways: with the player opting for stealth, launching a direct assault via helicopter gunship, attempting to assassinate a target with a sniper rifle, and smuggling an explosive device into an enemy base by way of an unsuspecting patrol vehicle crew.22 The players actions affect the wider game world; for example, sabotaging a radar installation will open up new entry points, which was in order for Kojima to accomplish a true open world experience.23 According to Famitsu, Konami confirmed that the playable world in The Phantom Pain is two hundred times larger than that of Ground Zeroes, featuring a variety of climate conditions and environments.24 This allows the players to freely roam the map while proceeding to either story missions or sidequests, as in other games with nonlinear gameplay. In addition, players who have previously played Ground Zeroes are able to import save data into The Phantom Pain and gain special perks.24

Multiplayer
Metal Gear Solid V: The Phantom Pain includes two multiplayer modes: first, the new Metal Gear Online, developed by Kojima Productions newly formed Los Angeles division now known as Konami Los Angeles Studio.25 The first footage for multiplayer was revealed in December 2014.2627 While originally set for launch alongside the release of The Phantom Pain, Metal Gear Online was postponed to October 6 for consoles and January 2016 for Microsoft Windows.28

The second multiplayer mode is an extension of the Mother Base basebuilding feature. Players are able to expand their operations to include Forward Operating Bases which can be used to generate resources and income for the singleplayer campaign.29 These facilities can be attacked by other players, making a playerversusplayer mode available whereby the attacking team attempts to steal resources andor soldiers and the defending team tries to protect the Forward Operating Base from the intruder. Defenders will be able to call on their friends to aid in the defense, especially if their Forward Operating Base is attacked during a story mission.30 Players are able to customize the security, staffing, and layout of their Forward Operating Bases, allowing for a large number of compound configurations. Following the success or failure of the intrusion, the location of the attacking players Forward Operating Base is revealed to the defending player;31 however, defending players can only launch a retaliatory strike if the attacker was discovered during their infiltration. The Forward Operating Base feature is intended to be an entirely separate multiplayer experience to Metal Gear Online29 and is also needed to increase the number of combat units the player can deploy.

During development, Kojima Productions and Konami attracted criticism for their decision to include microtransactions; a system that allows players to pay for access to content in the game. However, a spokesperson for Kojima Productions confirmed that the system was included to benefit players who may not have the time to complete the game, given its scale, and that no content would be available exclusively through microtransactions.32 Further controversy emerged following the publication of an early review claiming that the Forward Operating Base mode was behind a paywall,33 which Konami refuted saying that microtransactions acted as an accelerator rather than a paywall.34

Plot
Metal Gear fictional chronology
1964  Snake Eater
1970  Portable Ops
1974  Peace Walker
1975  Ground Zeroes
1984  The Phantom Pain
1995  Metal Gear
1999  Metal Gear 2: Solid Snake
2005  Metal Gear Solid The Twin Snakes
200709  Sons of Liberty
2014  Guns of the Patriots
2018  Metal Gear Rising: Revengeance
vte
Premise
In the aftermath of the events of Ground Zeroes and the destruction of Militaires Sans Frontires commonly abbreviated as MSF, Big Boss Kiefer SutherlandAkio tsuka falls into a coma.35 Nine years later, he awakens and helps lead a new mercenary group, Diamond Dogs.36 Adopting the codename Venom Snake, he ventures into Afghanistan during the SovietAfghan War and the AngolaZaire border region during the Angolan Civil War to track down the men responsible for MSFs destruction. Along the way, he becomes reacquainted with his former rival Ocelot Troy BakerSatoshi Mikami and encounters Quiet Stefanie Joosten, an assassin and sniper with supernatural abilities. While he and Kazuhira Miller Robin Atkin DownesTomokazu Sugita are initially driven to exact revenge, Snake soon unearths a plot by the Patriots organization to develop a new model of the Metal Gear system known as the ST84 Sahelanthropus.37

Characters
See also: List of characters in the Metal Gear series
In contrast to previous Metal Gear installments, Kojima Productions conducted the voice acting and motion capture with Englishspeaking actors and stuntmen first. While facial capturing was used before for Metal Gear Solid 4, it was done separately from the actual voice acting. The Japanese voice acting was dubbed over the English casts performance afterward, in contrast to previous releases in the series since Metal Gear Solid 2, which had the characters vocal and facial expressions lipsynched specifically to both, Japanese and English voice acting.

This time, Snake wont really speak much at all. Metal Gear Solid V: The Phantom Pain is an open world game focused on giving freedom to the player who will drive Snakes actions. Snake himself will be more of a silent protagonist similar to Mad Max in Mad Max 2. Its the characters around him who will expand the story.
Hideo Kojima38
At E3 2013, Konami confirmed that actor Kiefer Sutherland would provide Snakes voice and motion capture work for the game,394041 taking a role over voice actor David Hayter.42 Kojimas reason for replacing Hayter was to have a more subdued performance expressed through subtle facial movements and tone of voice rather than words, and that he needed someone who could genuinely convey both the facial and vocal qualities of a man in his late 40s. Hollywood producer and director Avi Arad suggested to Kojima that Sutherland could fulfill his requirements.434445 Akio tsuka was unaffected by this casting change and continued to voice Snake in the Japanese version.46 On March 4, 2015, Kojima revealed that Snake would have less dialogue in The Phantom Pain than previous installments. The reasoning behind it was to make Snake come across as an extension to the player and that he will act based on players actions rather than doing things like making spontaneous comments or flirting with women.38

Other members of the voice cast include Troy Baker as Ocelot,47 Jay Tavare as Code Talker,48 James Horan as Skull Face, Robin Atkin Downes as Kazuhira Miller, Christopher Randolph as Dr. Emmerich49 and Piers Stubbs as Eli. The Japanese dub features Tomokazu Sugita as Miller, Hideyuki Tanaka as Emmerich, Takaya Hashi as Skull Face, Satoshi Mikami as Ocelot, Osamu Saka whose previous roles include Sergei Gurlukovich in Metal Gear Solid 2: Sons of Liberty and The End in Metal Gear Solid 3: Snake Eater as Code Talker,5051 and Ytar Honj as Eli.52 Dutchborn model Stefanie Joosten provides the likeness, voice and motion capture for the new heroine Quiet,50 a mute sniper with supernatural abilities who may assist Snake on missions depending on the players actions during a certain mission.53 She also provides the vocals for Quiets Theme.

Synopsis
In 1984, nine years after the events of Metal Gear Solid V: Ground Zeroes, Big Boss awakens from a coma in a hospital in Cyprus. Quiet, a Cipher assassin, tries to kill him, but Big Boss is rescued by a heavily bandaged man called Ishmael. The pair escapes the hospital while evading pursuit from Ciphers soldiers and two superhumans, Tretij Rebenok, the Third Child and the Man on Fire. Although Big Boss loses sight of Ishmael, he is recovered by his ally Revolver Ocelot and brought aboard Diamond Dogs, a new mercenary group founded by Kazuhira Miller on an offshore platform near Seychelles.

Big Boss adopts the code name Venom Snake and begins searching for Cipher. During his journey, Snake becomes involved in the SovietAfghan and the Angolan Civil Wars, and he recruits Quiet, who no longer speaks and has gained superhuman abilities; scientist Dr. Huey Emmerich; Eli, a British child believed to be a clone of Snake, who leads a band of child soldiers; and Code Talker, a Navajo expert on parasites forced to work for Cipher.

Snake learns that Ciphers leader Major Zero was usurped and XOF, a rogue faction of Cipher, was responsible for destroying MSF. XOFs leader Skull Face considers Ciphers plan to unite the world for peace as the same as making it culturally American, obliterating other cultures. To avoid this, he intends to release a unique parasite that kills anyone who speaks English. A modified parasite was used to give Quiet and Skull Faces elite soldiers, the Skulls, their unusual abilities. After releasing the English strain parasite, Skull Face plans to make nuclear weapons available to as many groups as he can, believing that nuclear deterrence will stop the weapons actually being used, attaining world peace while still protecting the integrity of each culture. However, he will secretly retain remote control of the weapons. Skull Face intends to use the threat of the latest Metal Gear system, known as ST84 Sahelanthropus, to make nuclear weapons desirable again, but as he cannot get it to function, he is dependent on the Third Childs psychic abilities to manipulate it.

During a test, the Third Child turns against Skull Face, having Sahelanthropus seriously wound him and crush the Man on Fire. Although Snake defeats the Metal Gear, he is only able to recover one of Skull Faces three parasite vials; one goes missing and the other is taken by the Third Child and given to Eli. Skull Face is left to die by Snake and Miller but Huey executes him. The Diamond Dogs return to their base with Sahelanthropus. Following their return, Eli, the Third Child, and the child soldiers steal Sahelanthropus and flee the base. It transpires that the Third Child was not consciously working for Skull Face, but his psychic powers enthralled him to the will of the most vengeful person nearby, meaning Sahelanthropuss attack was instigated by Eli.

An epidemic of parasites occurs on base forcing Snake to personally kill many of his own men to contain it. To honor them, he has their cremated remains turned into diamonds to carry into battle. Huey is accused of causing the epidemic while attempting to mutate the parasites to sell as weapons. Alongside suspicion of his role in MSFs destruction, and evidence that he murdered his wife Dr. Strangelove while arguing over using their son in experiments, Snake exiles him from Diamond Dogs. Following this event, Quiet disappears in Afghanistan. Code Talker reveals that Quiet was infected with the English strain parasite with the intention of joining Diamond Dogs in order to spread it, but her allegiance shifted to Snake and so she remained silent to prevent an outbreak. Hueys mutation of the parasite convinced Quiet that she could not guarantee the safety of Diamond Dogs. Snake finds her and helps her fight an onslaught of vehicles. They defeat the wave but as another one approaches they are forced to hide in a sandstorm. Quiet is then forced to speak to summon help when Snake is bitten by a venomous snake. She flees to avoid causing another epidemic.

It is later revealed that Venom Snake is not actually Big Boss but a loyal MSF medic caught in the same explosion that injured the real Big Boss, Ishmael. During his coma, the medic was transformed into a second Big Boss via plastic surgery and hypnotherapy to serve as a decoy for the actual Big Boss while he wages a covert war against Cipher. Snake goes on to set the events of the Outer Heaven uprising in motion and dies at the hands of Solid Snake. The original Big Boss resurfaces during the Zanzibar Land disturbance. Miller and Ocelot discuss Big Boss plans to create Outer Heaven. While Ocelot remains supportive, Miller is disgusted at his former allys deception but agrees to continue assisting Venom Snake and Big Bosss sons in hopes of contributing to the real Big Bosss downfall.

Development

A recruiting poster, based on the famous recruitment poster, used at GDC 2012
In February 2012, a site owned by Konami, Development Without Borders, promoted development for a new Metal Gear title, for The next MGS. The site was recruiting staff for the 2012 GDC pavilion in March, and requested applications for several positions for the latest Metal Gear Solid targeted for highend consoles and nextgen Fox engine.5455 As the year went on, screenshots and videos of the newly announced Fox Engine were unveiled by the team.56 This media demonstrated many random settings and characters, although none related to the Metal Gear series. Certain screenshots, however, were noted to feature a character who resembled the Big Boss character of Metal Gear, walking up to a Stryker AFV previously seen in Metal Gear Solid 4.57

Konami unveiled Metal Gear Solid: Ground Zeroes at a private function celebrating the twentyfifth anniversary of the Metal Gear series on August 30, 2012. The game later made its public debut two days later at the 2012 Penny Arcade Expo.58 Kojima revealed very little detail about the project at the time other than it was a prologue to Metal Gear Solid V,59 and that it would be the first game to use the Fox Engine, a game engine developed by Kojima Productions.60 In January 2013, Kojima revealed that Ground Zeroes would be the first title in the series to be subtitled in Arabic, a feature the team had planned for previous games.61 He also confirmed that the length of the cutscenes was reduced, as he believed that long cutscenes had become outdated.2062

In an interview with VG247, Kojima expressed concerns over whether or not Ground Zeroes would be released. He claimed that his aim was to target taboos and mature themes, which he considered to be quite risky, adding that his roles as creator and producer were in conflict with one another; as creator, Kojima wanted to take the risk of exploring themes that might alienate audiences, but as producer, he had to be able to tone down the content in order to sell as many copies of the game as possible. Ultimately, the role of creator won out, and Kojima described his approach as prioritizing creativity over sales.636465


Poster distributed in E3 2013, with visual effects by Kyle Cooper.
At the Spike Video Game Awards in December 2012, a teaser trailer for a game known as The Phantom Pain was shown, credited to a new Swedish developer known as Moby Dick Studio, and was described as being 100 gameplay. Allegedly led by Joakim Mogren, the studios mission statement read that it aimed to deliver an uncompromising, exciting, and touching game experience to people all around the globe.66 After the presentation, commentators speculated that The Phantom Pain was actually a Metal Gear game, noting the protagonists resemblance to Big Boss, graphics similar to those produced by the Fox Engine, the quote V has come to at the end of the trailer, and that the title Metal Gear Solid V fits in the negative space and indentations of the games logo when using the same font.6768 The name Joakim was an anagram of Kojima, the domain name for the studios website had only been registered about two weeks prior to the announcement, and that several people wearing Moby Dick Studio shirts were sitting in a VIP area intended for Konami staff.6769 Hideo Kojima stated he was impressed by the trailer and how Mogren was inspired by Metal Gear.70

An actor playing a heavily bandaged Mogren appeared in an interview on the March 14, 2013 episode of GameTrailers TV; while stating that he could not reveal many details, he confirmed that more details about The Phantom Pain would be revealed at the upcoming Game Developers Conference, and showed a series of screenshots on an iPad to the shows host Geoff Keighley. After Keighley pointed out the Fox Engine logo in the screenshots, Mogren appeared nervous and the segment abruptly ended.71

On March 27, 2013, at GDC 2013, Kojima confirmed that his studio was behind the trailer, and announced that Metal Gear Solid V would be two separate games; Ground Zeroes would now serve as a prologue for the main game, which was officially announced as Metal Gear Solid V: The Phantom Pain.7273 He subsequently presented a trailer for the game and showcased the Fox Engine.74 The trailer featured the song Not Your Kind of People from Garbages 2012 album of the same name.7576

While the official trailer announcing the game was running on a PC, the game was released for the seventh and eighth generations of video game consoles. In an interview during E3 2013, when asked about a PC release Kojima stated We are making it, and it will be on par with the PlayStation 4 and Xbox One versions.77 However, he made it clear that the PC port was not their priority.78 Kojima confirmed that the visuals seen in the trailer would look close to those in the final game. He also stated that he would like Metal Gear Solid V to be his final Metal Gear game, noting that unlike previous titles where he had announced that he had finished making games in the series, only to return for subsequent games, his involvement with the franchise would be over this time around. Although the trailer had Snake suffering from hallucinations in the form of a flaming whale, Kojima assured that there would be a balance in realism.79 Kojima later revealed that The Phantom Pain was initially presented as an independent game so as to assess the public and industry response to the Fox Engine, as he felt that announcing the game as part of Metal Gear Solid V would bias reactions to the engine.

On June 10, 2013, at E3 2013, a fourth trailer was shown at the Microsoft press conference, demonstrating the new play mechanics, as well as the cast of characters. The development of an Xbox One version was also announced at the conference.80 The PlayStation 4 version was announced the following day when Konami uploaded the red band version of the trailer on their YouTube channel in addition to the standard green band version.8182

The trailers for Metal Gear Solid V showed the game running on a PC hardware, but according to Kojima with textures and character models somewhat based on seventh generation hardware. The developers aimed to improve the technical quality for the versions released for the eighth generation of consoles.83

Kojima alluded to the game possibly being too big to clear, adding that the game is 200 times larger than Ground Zeroes.84 Kojima wanted the player to connect with Snake in The Phantom Pain. To accomplish this, the loss of Mother Base, which the player developed throughout Peace Walker, would serve as motivation for revenge for both Snake and the player. Kojima also tried making Snake relatable to newcomers of the series by making him unaware of what happened in the nine years during which he was in a coma.85 Weapons, vehicles and other armaments are unlicensed and fictional in The Phantom Pain, just as they were in Ground Zeroes, unlike previous Metal Gear Solid games that included mostly realworld based weaponry.

On June 9, 2014, at E3 2014, a fifth cinematic trailer featuring Mike Oldfields song Nuclear was shown at the Sony press conference, unveiling more plot details surrounding the Diamond Dogs and Snakes antagonistic descent. It was leaked a day earlier, due to an accidental post from Konamis official YouTube channel.86 Alongside the new trailer, the official site for Metal Gear Solid V was updated and included new information and images such as the developmental progress of the ingame map and the evolution of Snakes design across all games in the series.87 On August 25, 2015, Kojima released a launch trailer showing Metal Gears Evolution and Harmony with clips from the previous games along with the reveal of the new Metal Gear Sahelanthropus.

Over 80 million was spent on the development of the game.88

Music
Main article: Discography of the Metal Gear series  Metal Gear Solid V Original Soundtrack
The music of The Phantom Pain was produced by Harry GregsonWilliams, making it his fourth Metal Gear title. It was released on September 2, 2015. In July 2015, Rika Muranaka told Fragged Nation in an interview that over 30 commissioned songs were never used, thus playing part in Konamis budget concerns over the Metal Gear Solid V project.89 In the game, players can acquire cassette tapes in the field, which can then be played in freeroam, during a mission, the Airborne Command Center, or when the helicopter inserts or extracts Snake. The tapes include a variety of pop songs, instrumentals, and theme music from previous games in the Metal Gear series.

The games soundtrack later won the award for Best ScoreSoundtrack at The Game Awards 2015.90 The event also had Stefanie Joosten, Quiets voice actress, on stage performing Quiets Theme.

Dispute between Konami and Kojima
Further information: Kojima Productions  Closure
In March 2015, Konami announced plans for a corporate restructuring that saw them part ways with Hideo Kojima and his development studio Kojima Productions. As part of the separation, Kojimas name was removed from the game cover, all of its associated paraphernalia and future releases of Metal Gear Solid V: Ground Zeroes and Metal Gear Solid: The Legacy Collection.91c A Konami spokesperson stated that Kojima would still be involved with Konami and the Metal Gear franchise,27 and despite the dispute, the company expressed confidence that the game would be declared Game of the Year.92

Release
Metal Gear Solid V: The Phantom Pain was released in different editions. Special Day One editions of the game for each platform featured downloadable content DLC vouchers for special weapons and Metal Gear Online experience points. The North American Collectors Edition which was available for PS4 and Xbox One comes with a steelbook and a smallsize replica of Snakes bionic arm; the Premium Package for the Japanese release which was available for PS4, PS3, and Xbox One features a fullsize replica, which was also sold separately in May 2016.93 Sony released a PlayStation 4 bundle with the unit painted in the colors of the arm.

The physical PC release of The Phantom Pain only includes a CD key and a disc with a Steam installer contained within. Game files are not included ondisc and must be downloaded.9495

Tiein products were also released for the game. Sony Mobile Communications released special edition Walkman, Xperia Z4, Xperia Z3 Tablet Compact, and Xperia J Compact devices, each featuring Outer Heaven emblems, soundtrack audio, and wallpapers.96 Watch manufacturer Seiko released a digital watch, resembling Venom Snakes watch from the game. Eyeglasses maker JF Rey produced themed eyewear patterned after what Kaz and Ocelot are wearing in the game. Japanese toy company Sentinel, which previously made an iDroid casing for the iPhone 5 and 5S, produced a transformable figure of the Sahelanthropus,97 while Kotobukiya readied a 1100 scale kit of the unit. Sports apparel company Puma joined the project through a line of sports jackets, Tshirts, and footwear, including Snakes sneaking boots.9899

Square Enixs PlayArts Kai figure line featured several of the games characters, while Kaiyodo produced Venom Snake and a Soviet Army soldier for the RevoMini figure category. An art book, titled The Art of Metal Gear Solid V, was published by Dark Horse Comics on November 2, 2016.100

A complete edition of the game, titled Metal Gear Solid V: The Definitive Experience,d was released for PlayStation 4, Xbox One and Steam on October 11 in North America, October 13 in Europe, and November 10 in Japan. The bundle includes the Ground Zeroes prologue and The Phantom Pain in one package, along with all previously released downloadable content for both games.101

Reception
Critical response
Reception
Aggregate score
AggregatorScore
MetacriticXONE 95100102
PS4 93100103
PC 91100104
Review scores
PublicationScore
Destructoid910105
EGM9.510106
Eurogamer910107108 
4.55 stars109
Famitsu4040110
Game Informer9.2510113
Game Revolution4.55 stars111
GameSpot101033
GamesTM1010114
Giant Bomb55 stars112
IGN1010115
OXM UK1010116
PC Gamer US93100117
Polygon910118
Digital Spy55 stars119
Metro910120
PlayStation LifeStyle1010121
The Guardian55 stars122
The Independent55 stars123
The Daily Telegraph55 stars124
Time55 stars125
Metal Gear Solid V: The Phantom Pain received universal acclaim from critics, according to review aggregator Metacritic.102103104

Vince Ingenito of IGN awarded the game a score of 1010, complimenting the way the gameplay mechanics worked together and the organic nature of the openended missions that allowed players to create their own memorable experiences, without being punished for deviating from stealth. The review concluded that The Phantom Pain is a gameplay marvel, rewarding intelligence and creativity in a way few games do.115 GameSpot also gave the game a 1010, similarly praising its near impeccable gameplay, commenting that, alongside main and side missions, emergent scenarios serve as the third pillar of The Phantom Pains openworld gameplay experience. The review also highlighted the meaningful development of the characters despite being beholden to the original Metal Gear as the conclusion of Venom Snakes character arc.33 The Phantom Pain was the twentythird gameand the third in the Metal Gear seriesto ever receive a perfect 4040 review rating from Japanese magazine Famitsu.110

EGM awarded the game 9.510, praising the storys emotional power and thematic concerns exploring the futility of war in a much more compelling and cohesive way than other franchises such as Call of Duty and Battlefield, as well as the way in which the game world responded to the players actions. However, the review was critical of the reliance on resource management, particularly in the way assaults on Forward Operating Bases could interrupt and distract from key missions.106 Destructoid awarded it a score of 910, saying that the game is equal parts tough and flashy, and its fitting that if this is Kojimas last Metal Gear, he goes on a high note.105

Game Informers Joe Juba awarded the game 9.2510, praising the mission design for its flexibility and offering players multiple pathways to completion without restricting their choice of weapons or equipment. However, despite seeing the value in restructuring the narrative to compliment the open world platform and the episodic mission structure given the series complex mythology, Juba felt that this went too far with the result being that the player could stumble into crucial story elements without context.113 Polygons Michael McWhertor also awarded the game 910, similarly praising the game mechanics, but directing criticism at the convoluted storyline which it felt hinged on a detailed knowledge of the series mythos to the point where it would be inaccessible to newcomers to the franchise.118

The Phantom Pain was also positively received outside the traditional gaming media. In a fivestar review, The Telegraphs Kirk McKeand stated that the game takes the best of a great series and creates a series best in the process. The review complimented the seamless integration of the gameplay modes and noted the way the games Mother Base mode offered satisfactory and meaningful progress,124 a sentiment echoed by Times Matt Peckham,125 who also complimented the games longevity, pacing and artificial intelligence.126

While much of The Phantom Pain received plaudits, the game was criticized by some reviewers who felt it was lacking in terms of a focused and compelling narrative with interesting characters, especially when compared to prior Metal Gear titles. Ingenito opined that its story would be divisive for longterm fans, calling it insubstantial and underdeveloped, with plotrelated questions generally being answered in a rushed and unsatisfying way and a tendency for the game to gloss over its subject matter. He wrote how much of the characterization and memorable moments seen in previous installments had been replaced with individuals doing little more than appearing in scenes, giving information and then standing around. In addition, he called out the frequent lack of communication from Kiefer Sutherland as Venom Snake throughout important plot sections as positively jarring.115 Kotakus Jason Schreier argued that the story was damn unfulfilling, having terrible pacing, incoherent dialogue, and incomprehensible character motivations. He echoed Ingenitos view of Snake, calling him in cutscenes nearly silent to the point of awkwardness ... where his response to emotional events will often just be to look at people.127 David Roberts, writing for GamesRadar, described the story as unconventional and full of loosely connected scenes, saying a whole lot of nothing happens in between quick bursts of exposition. He praised Kiefer Sutherland as Snake, but criticized Skullface as being greatly undeveloped as a villain and being met with one of the most anticlimactic showdowns in video game history. Roberts also wrote how the story drifts along aimlessly in the second half and which ultimately felt hollow from not giving closure to the end twist that the player is not controlling Big Boss.128 Similarly, the story ending and reveal that Venom Snake and Big Boss were two different characters also drew a polarizing response from critics.

The Phantom Pain was also criticized for forcing players to replay missions on higher difficulty settings to unlock the final missions,33105115 with Schreier saying that it added unnecessary padding to a section of plot conveying the games most emotional events.127

Portrayal of Quiet
Main article: Quiet Metal Gear
Before the release of the game, the presentation of the female character Quiet became a topic of controversy concerning her appearance. Halo designer David Ellis criticized her for being oversexualized and a negative affirmation of the stereotype of the game industry as full of man babies.129130131 Kojima and Konami released Quiet figurines in May 2015 as part of the games promotion. The figures soft, pliable breasts were criticized in social media and in the press.132133134

The finished game drew more criticism of Quiets portrayal in both reviews and opinion pieces.135136 GamesRadars David Roberts described Quiet as one of the most complex and conflicted characters in MGS5, but that her depiction was an example of a juvenile approach to sexuality that typifies Kojimas work and the Metal Gear series as a whole.137 Michael McWhertor of Polygon described the justification for Quiets lack of clothing as inextricably tied to the games convoluted story, and criticized how the game presented other female characters by zeroing in on their jiggling breasts and panning across their asses in a silly, oversexualized way.118

Removed content
Further information: Kojima Productions  Closure
Following the release of the game, those who had bought the Collectors Edition discovered that the bonus disc included cutscenes and concept art of an ingame mission, Episode 51: Kingdom of the Flies, that continued on from the end of the campaign, having not been playable in the game. The story ending was criticised for feeling abrupt and leaving several plot points unresolved, and critics found that the removed mission tied up one such important plot thread whilst also providing closure to the relationship between two of the characters. Consequently, many agreed that the inclusion of Episode 51 would have given the game a more satisfactory conclusion.138139140128

Another large criticism of the story was the decision to force players to replay past missions to progress through its second half,33105115127128 with one theory being that original content had been envisioned but which had not been incorporated into the finished game due to time constraints, resulting in the reused sections.141142 This assumption was supported by further evidence of removed content: not long after the discovery of Chapter 51, users of the Facepunch forums who had been extracting data from the PC version of the games files found evidence of a third story chapter, titled Chapter 3: Peace, that was not included in the final version of the game.143144 Konami later neither confirmed nor denied that Chapter 3 had been fully cut from the main game.145 Metal Gear Solid community manager Robert Allen Peeler was asked via Twitter if any upcoming downloadable content would be released for The Phantom Pain, in the hope that the story content would be included, but this was refuted.146 Many fans also believed that, due to the chapters title, it was somehow linked to Konamis Nuclear Disarmament Event which was opened shortly after launch with the goal of revealing a secret in the game, and which would close once all ingame nuclear weapons that had been manufactured by players were disposed of.147 Data miners had uncovered a related cutscene within the games files that would be released once the event had finished,148 however speculation still spread that Chapter 3 was connected in some way. Robert Allen Peeler discussed players suspicions via Twitter and Reddit and did not deny that further events may occur once the disarmament had concluded.149150 On February 2, 2018, the Nuclear Disarmament Event ending was triggered prematurely on the Steam version of the game, despite there still being over 9000 player nukes in existence at the time, resulting in the release of the previouslyuncovered cutscene.151152 After investigation, Konami announced that this was the result of a technical error owing to the games servers being sent incorrect values.153

Critics attributed the missing content to the disclosed tensions between Konami and Kojima during development, the general consensus being that Konami had given strict deadlines for the games release, having been dissatisfied with how much money Kojima had spent on development.141154127155156 Data miners also uncovered numerous other examples of lesser content that had not been included in the game, ranging from gameplay features to cutscenes, but what precisely had been removed as a result of the KonamiKojima conflict, and what had simply been abandoned earlier in development out of choice, was open to discussion.157158159 Regardless, due to the removed story content and subsequent narrative flaws, the game was labeled by some critics as being unfinished.141127160161162 Conversely, GamesRadar argued that the games incomplete state was deliberate on Kojimas part.163 Speaking to IGN, Kojima himself seemingly alluded to the fact that he considered the game unfinished when stating that the new intellectual property he was developing since leaving Konami later revealed as Death Stranding would be a complete game.164

After the announcement of Metal Gear Solid V: The Definitive Experience, which would include all previously released downloadable content, several fans took this as an opportunity to voice their concerns via Twitter about the missing content that had been uncovered, particularly with regards to Episode 51. Konami responded that Episode 51 had been removed in the early development stages of the game as it had not been intended to be a pivotal ending to the story, and that there were no future plans to have the mission available to play.165

Sales
Metal Gear Solid V: The Phantom Pain shipped 3 million physical copies within its first five days of release, across all platforms.166 On its release date, the game grossed US179 million.167 The Phantom Pain debuted at number one on the United Kingdom charts. It became the third biggest video game launch of 2015 in the UK, behind Batman: Arkham Knight and The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt.168 The Phantom Pain was the most successful launch for the series in the UK, beating the previous record holder, Metal Gear Solid 2: Sons of Liberty, by 37 percent.168 The game sold 411,199 physical retail copies on PlayStation 3 and PlayStation 4 within the first week of release in Japan, topping the Japanese software sales charts that week.169

The game sold noticeably more on the PlayStation family of consoles than the competing Xbox in the UK. Excluding computer sales, The Phantom Pain moved approximately 72 percent of copies on PlayStation 4, roughly three times the amount sold on the Xbox One, which accounted for 22 percent of sales. 3 percent of sales were on PlayStation 3, and 2 percent on Xbox 360.170 By the end of September 2015, Metal Gear Solid V: The Phantom Pain had shipped 5 million copies,171 and reached 6 million by the end of December 2015.172

Accolades
AwardCategoryResult
Golden Joystick Awards
Ultimate Game of the YearNominated
Critics ChoiceWon
Metacritic
Best PS4 Game of 2015Won
Best Xbox One Game of 2015Won
Best PC Game of 2015Nominated
Hobby ConsolasGame of the Year173Won
PanoramaGame of the Year174Won
PC GamerGame of the Year175Won
Game RevolutionGame of the Year176Won
GamesRadarGame of the Year177Won
GameDebate Global Game AwardsGame of the Year178Nominated
Best Action179Won
The Game Awards 201590
Best ActionAdventureWon
Best ScoreSoundtrackWon
Game of the YearNominated
Best Art DirectionNominated
2015 NAVGTR Awards180Game, Franchise ActionWon
Graphics, TechnicalNominated
Original Dramatic Score, FranchiseNominated
Animation, TechnicalNominated
Control Design, 3DNominated
Direction in a Game CinemaNominated
Game Design, FranchiseNominated
Game EngineeringNominated
Notes
 Credited to Konami Digital Entertainment.
 Known in Japan as Metaru Gia Soriddo Faibu Fantomu Pein V , Metal Gear Solid V: The Phantom Pain
 Gameplay videos have shown Kojimas name included within the game itself, with individual credits sequences for each mission.
 or Metal Gear Solid V: Ground Zeroes  The Phantom Pain in Japan
References
 Matulef, Jeffery October 6, 2013. Metal Gear Solid 5: The Phantom Pain reveals open world gameplay. Eurogamer. Retrieved August 24, 2015.
 Burns, Steven June 11, 2015. Why Metal Gear Solid 5: The Phantom Pain isnt just a bigger Ground Zeroes. VideoGamer.com. Retrieved August 24, 2015.
 Pellett, Matthew June 9, 2015. Metal Gear Solid 5 delivers spectacular open world stealth. PC Gamer. Retrieved August 24, 2015.
 Metal Gear Solid gets bigger and better in The Phantom Pain. PC Gamer. July 23, 2015. Retrieved August 24, 2015.
 L. Wilson, Jeffery June 11, 2014. Eyes On With Metal Gear Solid V: The Phantom Pain. PC Magazine. Retrieved August 24, 2015.
 Serrels, Mark September 18, 2014. Why Snake Is The Best Climber In Video Game History. Kotaku. Retrieved August 24, 2015.
 Otero, Jose June 10, 2015. 19 Awesome Details We Noticed In Metal Gear Solid 5: The Phantom Pain. IGN. Retrieved August 24, 2015.
 Maiberg, Emanuel 20 September 2014. Metal Gear Solid V Introduces Snakes OneEyed Wolf Buddy. GameSpot. Retrieved 24 October 2014.
 Metal Gear Solid 5: The Phantom Pain  the 11 best tactics youre not using right now  VG247. vg247.com. 3 September 2015.
 YinPoole, Wesley June 11, 2014. Managing Mother Base in Metal Gear Solid 5: The Phantom Pain. Eurogamer. Retrieved August 24, 2015.
 Toyad, Jonathan 27 September 2012. Metal Gear Solid Ground Zeroes to feature basebuilding, will support multiple devices. Eurogamer. Retrieved 27 September 2012.
 De Mato, Xav June 12, 2014. Recruiting goats and researching cardboard in Metal Gear Solid 5: The Phantom Pain. Joystiq. Retrieved August 24, 2015.
 How Mother Bases units help Snake in MGS 5. GamesRadar. June 28, 2015. Retrieved August 24, 2015.
 Metal Gear Solid V  African Jungle Gameplay w Dev Commentary. 25 September 2014. Retrieved 1 August 2015.
 MGSV: TPP  Freedom of Infiltration Gameplay Demo. YouTube. Retrieved 1 August 2015.
 Simmons, Alex August 13, 2014. Gamescom 2014: Metal Gear Solid 5s Tower Defense Style Multiplayer. IGN. Retrieved August 24, 2015.
 Cocker, Guy 28 September 2012. Metal Gear Solid: Ground Zeroes includes Mother Base, daynight cycle. Archived from the original on October 16, 2012. Retrieved 15 October 2012.
 Brown, Peter June 9, 2015. Metal Gear Solid 5: The Phantom Pain  15 Hours in Afghanistan. GameSpot. Retrieved August 24, 2015.
 Hindes, Daniel 19 September 2014. Everything We Learned From the Metal Gear Solid 5: The Phantom Pain TGS 2014 Trailer. GameSpot. Retrieved 24 October 2014.
 Nyxus 20 January 2013. Interviews from Dubai: Kojima on Gray Fox game, story telling in Ground Zeroes, next gen and more. Metal Gear Solid Unofficial Site. Archived from the original on February 8, 2013. Retrieved 20 January 2013.
 Dubayan 19 January 2013. My meeting with one of the greatest game directors: Hideo Kojima. Saudi Gamer. Archived from the original on 15 May 2013. Retrieved 20 January 2013.
 MGSV: TPP  Freedom of Infiltration Gameplay Demo. YouTube. Retrieved 1 August 2015.
 Sinha, Ravi. Metal Gear Solid Ground Zeroes: Ultimate Goal is To Give Players More Freedom. GamingBolt. Retrieved 15 March 2013.
 Famitsu feature: The Truth of the Rumors 2014. Gematsu. 20140410.
 E3 Interview.
 Metal Gear Solid 5: The Phantom Pain Multiplayer Revealed. IGN.com. Retrieved March 19, 2015.
 Metal Gear Solid creators involvement in series questioned, Konami removes branding. Polygon. Retrieved 19 March 2015.
 Newhouse, Alex August 3, 2015. Metal Gear Solid 5s Multiplayer Wont Be Available at Launch. GameSpot. Retrieved August 3, 2015.
 Kato, Matthew June 18, 2015. Update The Real Intel On Metal Gear Vs Forward Operating Bases. Game Informer. Retrieved August 24, 2015.
 Hillier, Brenna August 6, 2015. Invade other players worlds in FOB, Metal Gear Solid 5s MMO mode. VG247. Retrieved August 24, 2015.
 Splechta, Mike. Everything you need to know about Metal Gear Solid 5: The Phantom Pains Mother Base. Retrieved August 24, 2015.
 Newhouse, Alex. Metal Gear Solid 5 Gets Info About Bases, Microtransactions, Online Functionality. GameSpot. Retrieved 26 August 2015.
 Brown, Peter August 23, 2015. Metal Gear Solid V: The Phantom Pain Review. GameSpot. Retrieved August 23, 2015.
 Savage, Phil 26 August 2015. Metal Gear Solid V: The Phantom Pains multiplayer is not behind a paywall. PC Gamer. Retrieved 27 August 2015.
 Ishaan. Metal Gear Solid V Trailer Is Ground Zeroes  The Phantom Pain. Siliconera. Retrieved 2 April 2013.
 Rich Stanton 20151216. Whatever happened to Metal Gear Solid games creator Hideo Kojima?  Technology. The Guardian. Retrieved 20151222.
 Wales, Matt March 10, 2017. Metal Gear Solid 5  Sahelanthropus boss fight and how to beat the final mission. Eurogamer. Retrieved December 29, 2017.
 Albert, Brian. SNAKE WONT REALLY SPEAK MUCH AT ALL IN METAL GEAR SOLID 5. IGN. Retrieved 20 December 2015.
 Romano, Sal. Metal Gear Solid V clip teases Snakes new voice actor. Gematsu. Retrieved 3 June 2013.
 Brian. Snakes voice actor in Metal Gear Solid V to be revealed during Konamis preE3 show. GamingEverything. Retrieved 3 June 2013.permanent dead link
 Staff. Konamis preE3 stream: Kiefer Sutherland Playing Snake in Metal Gear Solid 5. VG247. Retrieved 6 June 2013.
 Narcisse, Evan 27 March 2013. Beloved Solid Snake Voice Actor Says He Wasnt Asked to Be in Metal Gear Solid V. Kotaku. Gawker Media. Retrieved 27 March 2013.
 Goldfarb, Andrew. Kiefer Sutherland Playing Snake in Metal Gear Solid V. IGN. Retrieved 7 June 2013.
 Metal Gear Solid 5  Behind The Scenes. YouTube. GamesHQMedia. 6 June 2013. Retrieved 24 October 2014.
 Metal Gear Solid 5: Kiefer Sutherland  More Cutscenes  IGN Conversation. YouTube. IGN. Retrieved 23 June 2014.
 E3 315 13.06.21 in Japanese.
 Reilly, Luke 12 June 2013. Troy Baker Confirmed as Ocelot in Metal Gear Solid V. IGN. Retrieved 13 June 2013.
 Jay Tavares Facebook.
 MGSV The Phantom Pain  Mission: Ground Zeroes  Opening en. YouTube.
 E3 314 13.06.12 in Japanese.
 Twitter  KojimaHideo: MGS in Japanese.
 HIDEOKOJIMA on Twitter: Had VO session. Satoshi MikamiOcelot, Tomokazu Sugita Kaz, Akio OtsukaSnake, Yutaro HonjoEli and meHideo..
 Metal Gear Solid 5: Exclusive Kojima QA on the TGS Demo now in 1080p. GameSpot.
 Purchese, Robert 22 February 2012. Next Metal Gear Solid targets highend consoles, nextgen Fox engine. Eurogamer. Retrieved 24 March 2013.
 Reilly, Luke 22 February 2012. Kojima Productions Hiring For Next Metal Gear Solid. IGN. Retrieved 24 March 2013.
 YinPoole, Wesley 2 March 2012. Hideo Kojima shows off impressive Fox Engine screenshots. EuroGamer.net. Retrieved 4 February 2013.
 McGarvey, Sterling 6 October 2011. Kojima Inspires With Fox Engine, Creative Vision At USC. Gamasutra. Retrieved 4 February 2013.
 Metal Gear Solid: Ground Zeroes PAX Prime 2012 Trailer. 3 September 2012. Retrieved 27 November 2012.
 Hillier, Brenna 3 September 2012. Metal Gear Solid: Ground Zeroes is a prologue, coming to PS3, Xbox 360. Retrieved 27 November 2012.
 Toyad, Jonathan 30 August 2012. Metal Gear Solid: Ground Zeroes shows off Fox Engine and possible openworld elements. GameSpot. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on 2 September 2012. Retrieved 31 August 2012.
 Rabbit 20 January 2013. Hideo Kojima Interview. At7addak. Archived from the original on 15 February 2013. Retrieved 20 January 2013.
 Oommen, Daniel 19 January 2013. One on One with Hideo Kojima. Youth Arabia. Archived from the original on January 22, 2013. Retrieved 20 January 2013.
 Akerman, Nick 22 February 2013. Metal Gear Solid: Ground Zeroes will tackle many taboos, may not release in its current state. VG247. Retrieved 22 February 2013.
 Metal Gear Solid Ground Zeroes  May Not Release In Its Current State And New Spinoffs, Possibly With The Boss. MGSTV. 22 February 2013. Archived from the original on 25 February 2013. Retrieved 22 February 2013.
 MoStWaNteD 22 February 2013. Konami: Metal Gear Solid: Ground Zeroes Tackles Lots of Taboos, Risky To Be Released. Latest News Explorer. Retrieved 22 February 2013.
 Makuch, Eddie 7 December 2012. The Phantom Pain revealed. GameSpot. Archived from the original on December 9, 2012. Retrieved 8 December 2012.
 Moriarty, Colin 7 December 2012. The Phantom Pain  Metal Gear Solid V?. IGN. Retrieved 8 December 2012.
 Evangelho, Jason 7 December 2012. The Phantom Pain Is Kojimas Viral Teaser for Metal Gear Solid: Ground Zeroes. Forbes. Retrieved 9 December 2012.
 Mallory, Jordan 8 December 2012. The Phantom Pain speculation roundup: Metal Gear?!. Joystiq. Retrieved 9 December 2012.
 Abu Nahel, Hakim 1 January 2013. Hideo Kojima Talks MGR, FOX Engine, and Phantom Pain. IGN. Retrieved 21 March 2013.
 The Phantom Pain Video  Joakim Mogren Interview. GameTrailers. 15 March 2013. Retrieved 24 March 2013.
 Ground Zeroes and Phantom Pain two different games. GameSpot. CBS Interactive. Retrieved 3 March 2015.
 Metal Gear Solid 5: The Phantom Pain revealed. CVG.com. Retrieved 27 March 2013.
 Metal Gear Solid 5: The Phantom Pain  Kojima speaks. VG247. Retrieved 3 March 2015.
 Metal Gear Solid V Is Official  FOX vs. XOF UPDATE: Trailer added. Kotaku. 27 March 2013. Retrieved 28 December 2014.
 Hideo Kojima on Twitter: Many people I met at party had already downloaded the song Not your kind of peopleGarbage, that I used in my MGS5 trailer. I have it in my iPod... TwitteHideo Kojima. 28 March 2013. Retrieved 28 December 2014.
 Watch Metal Gear Solid 5s intro to hear Kiefer Sutherland as Snake. Polygon. 24 September 2013. Retrieved 19 October 2013.
 E3 2013: Kojima Interview. GameTrailers. 12 June 2013. Retrieved 25 June 2013.
 Metal Gear Solid V: The Phantom Pain Kojima Interview. GameTrailers. 28 March 2013. Retrieved 29 March 2013.
 E3 2013: Metal Gear Solid V Coming To Xbox One. IGN. Retrieved 11 June 2013.
 Stanyon, Matt. Metal Gear Solid V E3 2013 Trailer Coming on 12th June 2013. Hybrid Games. Retrieved 7 June 2013.
 NextGeneration METAL GEAR METAL GEAR SOLID V: THE PHANTOM PAIN CuttingEdge Game Consoles PlayStation4 and Xbox One Confirmed as Release Platform.
 McWhertor, Michael. Kojima: Nextgen versions of Metal Gear Solid 5 will look better than E3 trailer. Polygon. Retrieved 13 June 2013.
 Dyer, Mitch 5 March 2014. Kojima Worried The Phantom Pain Is Too Big to Finish. IGN. Retrieved 5 March 2014.
 Mike Jackson 20140612. Interview: Hideo Kojima on darker themes and phantom cigars. Computer and Video Games. Archived from the original on 20140817. Retrieved 25 June 2014.
 Plunkett, Luke. Metal Gear Solid Vs E3 Trailer Isnt Waiting For E3. Kotaku. Retrieved 10 June 2014.
 Progress: Metal Gear Solid V: The Phantom Paim  Official Site. Metal Gear Solid V  Official Site. Retrieved 10 June 2014.
 YinPoole, Wesley 3 August 2015. New article on Konami paints a bleak picture. Eurogamer. Gamer Network. Retrieved 3 August 2015.
 Orselli, Brandon 31 July 2015. Metal Gear Solid Composer Says Hideo Kojima Split from Konami Over Budget Issues. nichegamer. Retrieved 21 September 2015.
 Nominees  The Game Awards 2015. The Game Awards. Ola Balola. 12 November 2015. Archived from the original on 14 November 2015. Retrieved 13 November 2015.
 YinPoole, Wesley. Konami announces plan for brand new Metal Gear series. Eurogamer. Retrieved 20 March 2015.
 Makuch, Eddie 30 August 2015. Its the Game of the YearGuaranteed, Konami Says About MGS5. GameSpot. Retrieved 30 August 2015.
   Sentinel International Co., Ltd. Sentineltoys.com. Retrieved 20151222.
 Metal Gear Solid 5: The Phantom Pain PC disc only contains Steam installer. VG247. Retrieved 22 December 2015.
 PC Gaming Is Getting Better, but Publishers Are Getting Worse. Gadgets 360. NDTV. Retrieved 22 December 2015.
 Sonys Metal Gear Solid Walkman is a truly tasteful video game tiein. The Verge. Retrieved 22 December 2015.
 Nunneley, Stephany 20150925. This Metal Gear Sahelanthropus figure is transformable and super cool. VG247.com. Retrieved 20151222.
 PUMA MGSV The Phantom Pain shirts, jackets and shoes get new pictures. Metal Gear Informer. 20150831. Retrieved 20151222.
   Metal Gear Solid V: The Phantom Pain  Web. Konami.jp. 20130404. Retrieved 20151222.
 McWhertor, Michael April 21, 2016. Dark Horse publishing The Art of Metal Gear Solid 5 this November. Polygon. Retrieved April 22, 2016.
 Gwaltney, Javy August 29, 2016. Metal Gear Solid V: The Definitive Experience Confirmed, Coming In October. Game Informer. Retrieved August 30, 2016.
 Metal Gear Solid V: The Phantom Pain for Xbox One Reviews. Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Retrieved August 24, 2015.
 Metal Gear Solid V: The Phantom Pain for PlayStation 4 Reviews. Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Retrieved August 24, 2015.
 Metal Gear Solid V: The Phantom Pain for PC Reviews. Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Retrieved August 24, 2015.
 Carter, Chris August 24, 2015. Review: Metal Gear Solid V: The Phantom Pain. Destructoid. Retrieved August 24, 2015.
 Campbell, Spencer August 23, 2015. Metal Gear Solid V: The Phantom Pain review. Electronic Gaming Monthly. Retrieved August 23, 2015.
 Metal Gear Solid V: The Phantom Pain Recensione.
 Metal Gear Solid V: The Phantom Pain Recenzja.
 Bailey, Kat September 2, 2015. Metal Gear Solid V: The Phantom Pain PlayStation 4 Review: All Good Things. USGamer. Retrieved September 2, 2015.
 Famitsu Review Scores: Issue 1395. Gematsu. August 25, 2015.
 Utley, Matt September 3, 2015. Metal Gear Solid V: The Phantom Pain Review. Game Revolution. Retrieved September 3, 2015.
 Shoemaker, Brad September 12, 2015. Metal Gear Solid V: The Phantom Pain Review. Giant Bomb. Retrieved September 12, 2015.
 Juba, Joe August 23, 2015. A Legend Worth Waiting For  Metal Gear Solid V: The Phantom Pain  PlayStation 4. Game Informer. Retrieved August 23, 2015.
 Metal Gear Solid 5: The Phantom Pain review. GamesTM. Retrieved September 12, 2015.
 Ingenito, Vince August 23, 2015. Metal Gear Solid 5: The Phantom Pain Review. IGN. Retrieved August 23, 2015.
 Official Xbox Magazine UK, October 2015, page 89
 Roberts, Samuel September 7, 2015. Metal Gear Solid 5 PC review. PC Gamer. Retrieved September 7, 2015.
 McWhertor, Michael August 27, 2015. Metal Gear Solid V: The Phantom Pain review. Polygon. Retrieved August 27, 2015.
 Donnelly, Joe September 8, 2015. Metal Gear Solid 5 review: The Phantom Pain is a gamechanging masterpiece. Digital Spy. Retrieved September 8, 2015.
 Jenkins, David September 1, 2015. Metal Gear Solid V: The Phantom Pain review  The ultimate Sneaking Mission. Retrieved September 1, 2015.
 Contreras, Paulmichael August 31, 2015. Metal Gear Solid V: The Phantom Pain Review  Uncharted Infiltration PS4. PlayStation LifeStyle. Retrieved August 31, 2015.
 Parkin, Simon September 3, 2015. Metal Gear Solid V: The Phantom Pain review  greatest stealth game ever made. The Guardian. Retrieved September 3, 2015.
 Fleming, Jack September 8, 2015. Metal Gear Solid V, review: Perhaps the finest actionstealth game ever made. The Independent. Retrieved September 8, 2015.
 McKeand, Kirk August 24, 2015. Metal Gear Solid V: The Phantom Pain review: a series best. London: The Telegraph. Retrieved August 24, 2015.
 Peckham, Matt August 24, 2015. Metal Gear Solid V: The Phantom Pain Is the Best Metal Gear Ever. time.com. Time. Retrieved August 28, 2015.
 Peckham, Matt 23 August 2015. After 30 Hours of Metal Gear Solid V: The Phantom Pain, Im Nowhere Near Finished. time.com. Time. Retrieved 29 August 2015.
 Metal Gear Solid V: The Phantom Pain: The Kotaku Review. Kotaku. Retrieved 11 January 2018.
 Roberts, David. Metal Gear Solid 5 is the best and most disappointing game of the year. GamesRadar. Retrieved 12 February 2018.
 Kojima addresses criticism over MGSVs sexy Quiet character. GameSpot. Retrieved 11 February 2015.
 Halo dev calls MGSV female character design disgusting.
 Metal Gear Solid 5 voice actress is doing a Lets Play of the game. polygon.com.
 Phillips, Tom 20150511. MGS5s seedy Quiet figure has squeezable boobs. Eurogamer.net. Retrieved 20151222.
 Parsons, Jeff. Seedy Metal Gear Solid action figure will have squeezable boobs. Mirror. Retrieved 11 January 2016.
 Metal Gear Solid Vs Quiet doll has squeezable breasts. metro.co.uk. 11 May 2015.
 Rouner, Jef. There is No Smart Reason for Naked Women in Video Games. Houston Press. Retrieved 11 January 2016.
 Tamburro, Paul. Lets Talk About THAT Quiet Scene in Metal Gear Solid. Crave. Retrieved 11 January 2016.
 Roberts, David. Quiet embodies Metal Gears complex relationship with women. Gamesradar. Retrieved 12 January 2016.
 Why Metal Gear Solid Vs Ending Is So Disappointing. Kotaku. September 10, 2015. Retrieved February 2, 2017.
 Why was this mission cut from Metal Gear Solid 5: The Phantom Pain?. VG247. Retrieved 24 September 2015.
 Lee, Patrick October 19, 2016. Without its deleted finale, Metal Gear Solid V has no ending at all. The A.V. Club. Retrieved February 2, 2017.
 Retrospective: Metal Gear Solid V  The Phantom Pain 2015. I Choose To Stand. 21 January 2016. Retrieved February 3, 2017.
 Trying to fit a story onto chapter 2 of MGSV: Phantom Pain. Mega Bears Fan. April 11, 2016. Retrieved February 3, 2017.
 Metal Gear Solid 5 The Phantom Pain Is An Unfinished Game, Had A Chapter 3 As Well. Gaming Bolt.
 Jones, Gary October 20, 2015. Metal Gear Solid 5: Konami give Kojima update as new Phantom Pain mission list revealed. Express.co.uk. Retrieved July 9, 2016.
 Metal Gear Solid 5: Producer Responds To Secret Chapter Questions As Fans Rally To Unlock It. GamingBolt. Retrieved 23 September 2015.
 Metal Gear Solid 5 Story DLC Not Happening Anytime Soon, Revisiting Camp Omega Clarified. GamingBolt. Retrieved 24 September 2015.
 The Secret Nuclear Disarmament Event. Konami. Retrieved 2 September 2016.
 Metal Gear Solid V: The Phantom Pain  Nuclear Disarmament Hidden Cutscene. YouTube. 12 September 2015. Retrieved 2 September 2016.
 MGS 5s Chapter 3 May Be Related To Nuclear Disarmament, But Konami Wont Trigger It Manually. GamingBolt. Pramath. 31 August 2016. Retrieved 2 September 2016.
 Regarding Peelers comments on chapter 3. Reddit. 31 August 2016. Retrieved 2 September 2016.
 Alexandra, Heather. After Years of Player Warfare, Metal Gear Solid V Secret Ending Triggered Prematurely. Kotaku. Retrieved 7 February 2018.
 Hall, Charlie. Metal Gear Solid 5 celebrates nuclear disarmament, but its a bug. Polygon. Retrieved 7 February 2018.
 Vincent, Brittany. The Metal Gear Solid V: The Phantom Pain Disarmament Was a Glitch After All. Twinfinite. Retrieved 15 February 2018.
 One Of Metal Gear Solid Vs Most Important Story Scenes Was Cut. Kotaku. Retrieved 23 September 2015.
 Carter, Chris. So, lets talk about Metal Gear Solid Vs ending. Destructoid.
 Leack, Jonathan. An Incomplete MGSV: The Phantom Pain Offers Clue to Why Kojima Was Let Go by Konami. Game Revolution. Retrieved 12 February 2018.
 Shabana Arif. This is what the missing content from MGS5: The Phantom Pain looks like. VG247.
 How Much Was Cut from Metal Gear Solid 5?. Gamerant.com. Retrieved 8 June 2017.
 Metal Gear Solid V: Every Piece Of Cut Content You Need To See. whatculture.com. Retrieved 8 June 2017.
 5 questions I have after beating Metal Gear Solid V: The Phantom Pain. VentureBeat. September 15, 2015. Retrieved February 2, 2017.
 Metal Gear Solid 5: The unfinished swan song. Eurogamer. September 22, 2015. Retrieved February 2, 2017.
 Rashid Sayed. Konami And Kojima Need To Give Answers Regarding Cut Content In Metal Gear Solid 5: The Phantom Pain. Gaming Bolt.
 Metal Gear Solid 5 is unfinished? Thats entirely the point. GamesRadar. September 21, 2015. Retrieved February 2, 2017.
 Hideo Kojima Suggests That Metal Gear Solid V WAS Unfinished. Crave Online. December 17, 2015. Retrieved February 3, 2017.
 Konami says MGS5s ending isnt missing, so everyone can calm down about it. Polygon. Allegra Frank. 31 August 2016. Retrieved 2 September 2016.
 Griffin, Andrew September 7, 2015. Metal Gear Solid 5 sells 3 million copies  most of them on PlayStation 4. The Independent. Retrieved 7 September 2015.
 Metal Gear Solid Vs opening day beats Jurassic World, Avengers combined. Destructoid.com. 20151014. Retrieved 20151222.
 Phillips, Tom 7 September 2015. Metal Gear Solid 5: The Phantom Pain is series biggest UK launch. eurogamer.net. Eurogamer. Retrieved 7 September 2015.
 Media Create Sales: 83115  9615. Gematsu. September 9, 2015.
 Blake, Nikki 7 September 2015. Metal Gear Solid 5 sells three times more copies on PS4 than Xbox One. destructoid.com. Destructoid. Retrieved 7 September 2015.
 FY2016 2nd Quarter Financial Results PDF. Konami. Retrieved October 30, 2015.
 Passalacqua, Michael. Metal Gear Solid 5: The Phantom Pain Shipped Over 6 Million Copies. IGN. Retrieved 30 January 2016.
 Alonso, lvaro November 20, 2015. Los mejores juegos de 2015. Hobby Consolas. Retrieved December 4, 2015.
 La tecnologia migliore del 2015. September 20, 2015. Retrieved December 4, 2015.
 Game of the Year 2015  Metal Gear Solid V: The Phantom Pain. December 16, 2015. Retrieved December 31, 2015.
 Best of 2015 Awards: Game of the Year. January 1, 2016. Retrieved January 8, 2016.
 Best games 2015. December 31, 2015. Retrieved January 8, 2016.
 Global Game Awards. Gamedebate.com. Retrieved 20151221.
 Global Game Awards 2015 Results: Best In Gaming. November 26, 2015. Retrieved December 4, 2015.
 NAVGTR Awards 2015. National Academy of Video Game Trade Reviewers.
Further reading
Metal Gear Solid V: The Phantom Pain  Strategy Guide, Gamer Guides, 2015
The Art of Metal Gear Solid V, Dark Horse Comics, 2016
Amy M. Green, Posttraumatic Stress Disorder, Trauma, and History in Metal Gear Solid V, Palgrave Macmillan, 2017
External links
Official website
Samsung Galaxy S5 Vector.svg2010s portalDragon149393.svgSpeculative fiction portalWPVG icon 2016.svgVideo games portal
vte
Metal Gear franchise
vte
Video games directed by Hideo Kojima
Categories: 2015 video gamesAmputees in fictionAngolan Civil War video gamesBioterrorism in fictionActionadventure gamesFiction about parasitesCold War video gamesFiction with unreliable narratorsGenetic engineering in fictionHypnosis in fictionInterquel video gamesKonami gamesOpen world video gamesPlayStation Plus gamesPlayStation 3 gamesPlayStation 4 gamesMetal Gear Main SeriesSovietAfghan War video gamesThirdperson shootersVideo game controversiesVideo games about revengeVideo games designed by Hideo KojimaVideo games developed in JapanVideo games directed by Hideo KojimaVideo games produced by Hideo KojimaVideo games set in 1984Alternate history video gamesVideo games set in AfghanistanVideo games set in AngolaVideo games set in CyprusWindows gamesXbox 360 gamesXbox One gamesProsthetics in fictionVideo games with custom soundtrack supportPlayStation 4 Pro enhanced games

Hideo Kojima
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
Hideo Kojima
Hideo Kojima 20100702 Japan Expo 1.jpg
Kojima at the 2010 Japan Expo
Native name 
BornAugust 24, 1963 age 551
Setagaya, Tokyo, Japan
NationalityJapanese
OccupationVideo game designer, writer, director, producer
Years active1986present
Notable workMetal Gear series
Snatcher
Policenauts
Zone of the Enders series
AwardsGame Developers Conference Lifetime Achievement Award 20092
The Game Awards Industry Icon Award 20163
AIAS Hall of Fame Award 20164
Signature
Hideo Kojima Signature.png
Hideo Kojima   Kojima Hideo, born August 24, 1963 is a Japanese video game designer, screenwriter, director and game producer.

Regarded as an auteur of video games,5 during his childhood and adolescence he developed a strong passion for actionadventure cinema and literature. He was hired by Konami in 1986 for which he designed and wrote, in 1987, Metal Gear for MSX platform, a title that laid the foundations for stealth games and his best known and most appreciated series. The title that consecrated him as one of the most acclaimed video game designers is indeed Metal Gear Solid, released in 1998 for PlayStation. Other notable video games he directed are visual novels Snatcher, released in 1988 and Policenauts, released in 1994.

In 2005, Kojima founded Kojima Productions,16 a software house controlled by Konami, and by 2011 he rose as vice president of Konami Digital Entertainment.7

In 2015, Kojima Productions split from Konami, becoming an independent software company. Later Kojima announced a collaboration with Sony Interactive Entertainment for a new action game, Death Stranding, currently in the finishing line for PlayStation 4. Since 2017 to 2018, he also edited a column for Rolling Stone dedicated to cinema, video games and analysis of the differences and similarities between the two mediums.8


Contents
1Biography
1.1Early life
1.2Career
1.2.11980s
1.2.21990s
1.2.32000s
1.2.42010s
2Influences and mentality
3Awards and accolades
4Works
4.1Metal Gear series
4.2SnatcherPolicenauts games
4.3Tokimeki Memorial series
4.4Zone of the Enders series
4.5Boktai series
4.6Castlevania series
4.7Other games
4.8Acting roles
5References
6External links
Biography
Early life
Kojima was born the youngest of three children in Setagaya, Tokyo, Japan.91 The family moved to Osaka when he was about four years old. The family watched movies every night and he wasnt allowed to go to bed till the film had finished.9

When he was young, the Kojima family moved to a small city called Shirasaki.10 His family soonwhen? moved to Kawanishi, Hygo11 in the Kansai region.10 He was 13 years old when his father died and Kojima has commented that early on in his life he had to deal with death.109 Kojima was a latchkey kid, often having to look after himself when he came home from school.10 Staying at home by himself in isolation still affected him as he stated in a 2004 interview, whenever I travel and stay at a hotel I put the TV on as soon as I enter the room, just to deal with the feeling of loneliness.10

He wanted to be an artist, filmmaker, or illustrator, but felt discouraged by the pressure of social norms favoring a stable, salaried job over creative pursuits, and also because his uncle was an artist who struggled to make a living. The death of Kojimas father, which left the entire family poorer, was another reason.10 As a young adult, he began studying economics9 while writing short stories in his spare time; he submitted some of these to magazines but was not able to get anything published. He cites that his stories were often 400 pages long while most magazines wanted their short stories to be around 100 pages.10 Eventually, he shifted his creative focus to making films with a friend who had an 8mm camera.10

Career
In an interview on G4s TV series Icons,1213 Kojima revealed that while studying economics in university, he found himself playing video games during his free time, mainly on the Nintendo Famicom. In his fourth year in university, Kojima surprised his peers by announcing his intentions to join the video game industry, despite initially having ambitions of becoming a film director.14 He felt a career in video games would be more satisfying.15 The majority of his friends and peers strongly discouraged Kojima from pursuing video games due to it being a new medium that was not as respected or financially secure. His mother, however, remained supportive which gave Kojima the confidence to go ahead with his dream. He would later reflect positively upon his choice, stating, The industry was full of dropouts, people who felt like games offered them another chance. I met many people in that same situation; we bonded together through that in some sense.9 Kojima has cited Shigeru Miyamotos Super Mario Bros. 198511 and Yuji Horiis The Portopia Serial Murder Case 198316 as the games that inspired him to make this decision. He cited Hydlides open world game design as an influence.17 His literary influences include Kobo Abe, Ryu Murakami, Yukio Mishima, Kazuaki Takano, Project Itoh, Yasutaka Tsutsui, Seicho Matsumoto, Richard Levinson, William Link, and Paul Auster.18

1980s
After initial failed attempts to break into the video game industry, Kojima joined video game publisher Konamis MSX home computer division in 1986 as a designer and planner.12 Initially, he was disappointed with his assignment, and desired to work on Nintendo Entertainment System and arcade games insteadKojima felt the color palette of the system was too restrictive.15 Kojimas gameplay ideas were often overlooked initially, and due to his lack of familiarity with programming was repeatedly snubbed for his failures in his initial years at Konami. At one point Kojima considered leaving the company, but he hung on.12 The first game he worked on was Penguin Adventure, the sequel to Antarctic Adventure,10 as an assistant director. It significantly expanded upon the gameplay of Antarctic Adventure, adding more action game elements, a greater variety of levels, roleplaying elements such as upgrading equipment,19 and multiple endings.20 The first game he developed was Lost Warld sic, an MSX platform game in 1986. However, the game was ultimately rejected by Kojimas superiors at Konami.12

Kojima was asked to take over a project, Metal Gear, from a senior associate. Hardware limitations hindered the development of the games combat. Inspired by The Great Escape, Kojima altered the gameplay to focus on a prisoner escaping.15 It was released in 1987 for the MSX2 home computer in Japan and parts of Europe. The game revolves around a special forces operative codenamed Solid Snake, who is sent to the fortified state of Outer Heaven to stop a nuclearequipped walking tank known as Metal Gear. Metal Gear is one of the earliest examples of the stealth action game genre, where avoiding encounters with the enemies is emphasized over direct combat. A port of Metal Gear was released for the Nintendo Entertainment System. Kojima was not directly involved in the production of this version and he has openly criticized some of the changes made in the porting process,21 including poor translation and no ending boss fight with the titular weapon.

His next project was the graphic adventure game Snatcher, released for the NEC PC8801 and MSX2 computer platforms in Japan in 1988. The game, influenced by science fiction works such as Blade Runner, The Terminator, and Bubblegum Crisis, is set in a postapocalyptic world and centers around an amnesiac detective who faces a race of cyborgs the titular Snatchers that kill their victims, copy their likeness and assume their place in society.22 While Kojima and his team wrote the entire story of the game, they were forced to leave out the final act of the game due to time constraints. The game was highly regarded at the time for pushing the boundaries of video game storytelling, cinematic cut scenes, and mature content,23 and was praised for its graphics, soundtrack, high quality writing comparable to a novel, voice acting comparable to a film or radio drama, postapocalyptic setting, light gun shooter segments, and ingame computer database with optional documents that flesh out the game world. The Sega CD version of Snatcher was for a long time the only major visual novel game to be released in America. However, partly due to a Teen rating limiting its accessibility,22 it only sold a couple of thousand units, according to Jeremy Blaustein, a member of Snatchers localization team.24

1990s
In 1990, Kojima was involved in the productions of two MSX2 games: a spinoff of Snatcher titled SD Snatcher; and a sequel to Metal Gear titled Metal Gear 2: Solid Snake, which further evolved the stealth game genre. The player had more abilities, such as crouching, crawling into hiding spots and air ducts, distracting guards by knocking on surfaces, and using a radar to plan ahead. The enemies had improved artificial intelligence AI, including a 45degree field of vision, the detection of various different noises, being able to move from screen to screen, and a threephase security alarm. The game also had improved graphics and a complex storyline dealing with themes such as the nature of warfare and nuclear disarmament.2526

SD Snatcher is a roleplaying video game which adapts the storyline of the original Snatcher while featuring its version of the planned ending. The characters are depicted in a super deformed art style, in contrast to the original games realistic style. Like the original computer versions of Snatcher, it was only released in Japan. It abandoned random encounters and introduced an innovative firstperson turnbased battle system where the player can aim at specific parts of the enemys body using firearms with limited ammo. Such a battle system has rarely been used since,22 though similar battle systems based on targeting individual body parts can later be found in Squares Vagrant Story 2000, Bethesda Softworkss Fallout 3 2008, and Nippon Ichis Last Rebellion 2010.27

Due to the success of the original Metal Gear on the NES, Konami decided to create a sequel to the game, Snakes Revenge, without the involvement of Kojima. During a ride home on the train, Kojima met one of the staff members who worked on the game who asked him if he would create a true Metal Gear sequel.12 As a result, Kojima began plans for his own sequel titled: Metal Gear 2: Solid Snake. The game was only released in Japan for the MSX2, as one of the last games Konami produced for the computer system. The game would not be released overseas in North America and Europe until its inclusion in 2006s Metal Gear Solid 3: Subsistence.

All of his subsequent projects after Metal Gear 2 were produced primarily for discbased media, allowing for the inclusion of voice acting in his games. He remade Snatcher in 1992 for the PC Engine Super CDROM2. An English localization of the game was produced for the Sega MegaCD in North America and Europe in 1994. Kojima was not directly involved in the Sega CD version nor the subsequent PlayStation and Saturn ports released in Japan in 1996.

In 1994, Kojima released Policenauts, a film noirscience fictionthemed adventure game set in a space colony, for the NEC PC9821. Kojima oversaw the subsequent ports released for the 3DO in 1995; and the PlayStation and Saturn in 1996, which all featured animated cutscenes that were not in the PC98 release. Despite announcements for an English release in 1996,28 problems with synching the English dialogue with the cutscenes stopped its production.29 An unofficial English translation patch was released on August 24, 2009, to coincide with Kojimas 46th birthday.30 From 1997 to 1999, he developed the Tokimeki Memorial Drama Series, a trilogy of visual novel adventure games.31

With the release of Metal Gear Solid in 1998 for the PlayStation, Kojima became an international celebrity among the video game media. Metal Gear Solid was the first in the Metal Gear series to use 3D graphics and voice acting, which gave a more cinematic experience to the game. Metal Gear Solid was highly regarded for its welldesigned gameplay and for its characters and storyline, which featured themes of nuclear proliferation and genetic engineering.

2000s
In early 2001, Kojima released the first details of the sequel to Metal Gear Solid, Metal Gear Solid 2: Sons of Liberty, for the PlayStation 2. The games highly detailed graphics, physics, and expanded gameplay quickly made it one of the most anticipated games at the time.3233 The game was highly successful and critically acclaimed at release, due to its graphics, gameplay, and storyline, which dealt with myriad philosophical themes as specific as memes, censorship, manipulation, patricide, the inherent flaws of democracy and as grandiose as the nature of reality itself. While Metal Gear Solid 2 appealed to gamers with the discussion of these, the bewildering maze of dialogue and plot revelation in the final hours of the game was a disappointment for many gamers, who expected the Hollywoodstyle resolution of its forerunner.34

Before the release of Metal Gear Solid 2, Kojima produced the game and anime franchise Zone of the Enders in 2001 to moderate success. In 2003, he produced Boktai: The Sun Is in Your Hand for the Game Boy Advance, which players take the role of a young vampire hunter who uses a solar weapon which is charged by a photometric sensor on the game cartridge, forcing them to play in sunlight. Another team inside Konami, in a collaboration with Silicon Knights, began work on Metal Gear Solid: The Twin Snakes, a GameCube enhanced remake of the first Metal Gear Solid with all the gameplay features of Metal Gear Solid 2 and with cutscenes redirected by director Ryuhei Kitamura. It was released in 2004.

Afterwards, Kojima designed and released Metal Gear Solid 3: Snake Eater for the PlayStation 2. Unlike the previous games in the series, which took place in the near future and focused on indoor locations, the game is set in a Soviet jungle during the height of the Cold War in 1964, and features wilderness survival, camouflage, and James Bond styled espionage. The North American version was released on November 17, 2004, with the Japanese counterpart following on December 16. The European version was released on March 4, 2005. Critical response to the game was highly favorable. Kojima has said that his mother played it, It took her an entire year to complete Metal Gear Solid 3. She would get her friends to help her. When she defeated The End, a character the player faces off during the game she called me up and said: It is finished.35

At that time Kojima produced Boktais sequel, Boktai 2: Solar Boy Django for the Game Boy Advance. Released in summer 2004, it makes more extensive use of the cartridges sunlight sensor and allows players to combine various new solar weapons. Also released was Metal Gear Acid for the PlayStation Portable handheld. A turnbased game, it is less actionoriented than the other Metal Gear games and focuses more on strategy. It was released in Japan on December 16, 2004. Its sequel, Metal Gear Acid 2, was released on March 21, 2006.

Kojima wanted Solid Snake to appear in Nintendos Super Smash Bros. Melee, but Nintendo refused, due to development cycle problems. When Super Smash Bros. Brawl was in development, series director Masahiro Sakurai contacted Kojima to work and add Snake and content related to the Metal Gear series, including a stage based on Shadow Moses Island the main setting of Solid, into the game.36

Released in June 2008, Kojima codirected Metal Gear Solid 4: Guns of the Patriots with Shuyo Murata. Initially, Kojima was not going to direct it, but death threats made the team nervous and he decided to work with them.37 Kojima received a lifetime achievement award at the MTV Game Awards 2008 in Germany. In his speech, he said in English, I have to say, even though I received this award, let me state that I will not retire. I will continue to create games as long as I live.38

Before E3 2009, Kojima stated interest in working with a Western developer.39 This later turned out to be a collaboration between him and Spanish developer MercurySteam to work on Castlevania: Lords of Shadow.

Although he announced that Metal Gear Solid 4: Guns of the Patriots would be the last Metal Gear game he would be directly involved in,40 he announced at E3 2009 that he would return to help on two Metal Gear games: Metal Gear Rising: Revengeance, as a producer and Metal Gear Solid: Peace Walker as writer, director, and producer.41 When interviewed at Gamescom 2009, Kojima stated that he got more involved with Peace Walker because there was a lot of confusion within the team and it didnt proceed as I wanted it to. Therefore I thought that I needed to jump in and do Peace Walker.42

2010s

Kojima right with translator Aki Saito in 2010
Kojima was at E3 2010 to show off his teams latest project, Metal Gear Rising: Revengeance. He was also seen in Nintendos 3DS interview video, where he stated he was interested in making a Metal Gear Solid game for the 3DS and wondered what it would be like in 3D.citation needed This game ended up being a remake of Metal Gear Solid 3 titled Metal Gear Solid: Snake Eater 3D. In late 2011, Metal Gear Solid: Rising was renamed Metal Gear Rising: Revengeance with PlatinumGames being involved in developing it alongside Kojima Productions. Nevertheless, Kojima is the games executive producer and showed interest in working in the games demo.43 Kojima was satisfied with the final product and expressed the possibility of a sequel if Platinum were to develop it.44

On April 1, 2011, Kojima was promoted to Executive Vice President and Corporate Officer in Konami Digital Entertainment.45 At E3 2011, he revealed his new innovative gaming technology labeled as transfarring, a portmanteau of the verbs transferring and sharing. The technology enables gamers to transfer their gaming data from the PlayStation 3 to PlayStation Portable in a quick data transferring process and bring it on the go from home into the outside world.46

Later that year, he stated he was working on a new intellectual property with Goichi Suda, tentatively titled Project S, and preparing new projects. On July 8, 2011, Kojima announced that Project S was a radioshow sequel to Snatcher, titled Sdatcher as a reference to the shows producer Suda. The show would air on Fridays on Kojimas biweekly Internet radio show, starting with episode No. 300 which was broadcast in August 2011.47 In October, Kojima announced that he would be collaborating with Suda and 5pb. director Chiyomaru Shikura in producing a new adventure game visual novel.48 It was initially speculated that the game would be the third entry in 5pb.s Science Adventure series, but it was later confirmed to be a separate title.49 The game was planned to have an overseas release and an anime adaption.50 As of 2018, no further news regarding the project has been released.

In mid2012 and in the following years after Kojima finished work on the Fox Engine, Kojima has been connected to the Silent Hill series. During this time, he indicated that he was interested in making a Silent Hill game and the first instance of this was on August 18, 2012. He described his excitement regarding the potential use of the Fox Engine on the eighth generation platforms via a tweet of an image of the DVD for the Silent Hill film:5152 Later, he added what he had in mind for this game in a series of tweets: Silent Hill is in closed room setting and doesnt require full action so that we can focus on the graphic quality. Enemies featured in the game do not have to be consistent or move fast. It only requires scariness by graphics and presentation. As being a creator, making action games in an open world setting, such a type of game is very enviously attractive. If only someone could create this on the Fox Engine.53 After a while, and as a result of Kojimas interest in making a Silent Hill game, Konami asked him to do so. Kojima explained the story in an interview with Eurogamer:

In the past Ive mentioned Silent Hill in interviews, and as a result of that the president of Konami rung me up and said hed like me to make the next Silent Hill. Honestly, Im kind of a scaredycat when it comes to horror movies, so Im not confident I can do it. At the same time, theres a certain type of horror that only people who are scared of can create, so maybe its something I can do. That said, I think Silent Hill has a certain atmosphere. I think it has to continue, and Id love to help it continue, and if I can help by supervising or lending the technology of the Fox Engine, then Id love to participate in that respect.545556

Additionally, in an interview with Geoff Keighley, when a fan asked which game do you want to direct or reboot? Kojima stated without hesitation, Silent Hill.575859 Keighley jumped in and asked What do you want to do with Silent Hill? Kojima responded: A guy like myself that is such a chicken and is so easily scared  making a scary game  Im very confident that something horrifying would come out from that. But on the other hand I would have to prepare myself to have nightmares every single day. Hopefully sometime in the future Im able to work on this, but I would really need to prepare to have daily nightmares.citation needed In August 2014, PT was released on the PlayStation Store revealed that a new game in the Silent Hill franchise titled Silent Hills was being directed by Kojima for the PlayStation 4, alongside Mexican film director Guillermo del Toro.60 In April 2015, the playable teaser was removed and the game was cancelled.61

At the 2013 Game Developers Conference, Kojima unveiled Metal Gear Solid V: The Phantom Pain, which was set to be his final Metal Gear work, noting that this time unlike previous announcements that he had stopped working on the series, was very serious about leaving.62 In March 2015, reports began to surface that Kojima would part ways with longtime publisher Konami after the release of The Phantom Pain.63 Konami later stated that they were auditioning for new staff for future Metal Gear titles and removed Kojimas name from the series marketing material.64 Despite reports that Kojima left the company in October 2015, a spokesman for Konami stated that he was taking a long time off from work.65 At The Game Awards 2015, Metal Gear Solid V won the awards for Best Action Game and Best ScoreSoundtrack, but Kojima did not attend the event, being reportedly barred from attending by Konami.66 Instead, it was accepted by Kiefer Sutherland on his behalf.66

On December 16, 2015, Kojima announced that Kojima Productions would be reestablished as an independent studio, partnered with Sony Computer Entertainment, and that his first game would be console exclusive to the PlayStation 4.67 At E3 2016 in Los Angeles, Kojima personally announced the games title as Death Stranding in a trailer.68 The trailer showed actor and inspiration for the main character Norman Reedus, whom Kojima had previously worked with in the canceled Silent Hills.

In 2016, Kojima launched his own YouTube channel, where he and film critic Kenji Yano discuss their favorite films and matters pertaining to Kojimas studio.69 Starting in 2017, Kojima became a regular contributor to Rolling Stone, often discussing recent film releases, and occasionally drawing comparisons to his own works.70

Influences and mentality
Kojima has cited Yuji Horiis The Portopia Serial Murder Case 198316 and Shigeru Miyamotos Super Mario Bros. 198511 as the games that inspired him to enter the video game industry. Portopia Serial Murder Case, a murder mystery adventure game, was an important influence because, according to Kojima, it had mystery, a 3D dungeon, humor, and a proper background and explanation of why the murderer committed the crime. That is why there was drama in this game. My encountering this game expanded the potential of video games in my mind.16 Portopia had an influence on his early works, including Metal Gear and particularly Snatcher.71

Kojimas love of film is noticeable in his games where he pays homage through his stories and characters, sometimes to the point of pastiche, as in Snatcher. He cited a contrast between films and games as while in his games he intends to portray violence like in a movie, in the game it is up to the player to decide. He wants people to understand the effects of violence. As he considers the games too stressful, he also wants comic relief to contrast it.72

Snatcher is inspired by many science fiction films, particularly from 1980s, including Blade Runner,73 Akira,74 The Thing, Invasion of the Body Snatchers,75 and The Terminator.74 Examples of influence by films include Solid Snakes codename named after Snake Plissken from Escape from New York,21 Snakes alias in MGS2: Pliskin in reference to the last name of Snake Plissken from the Escape movies, Snakes real name Dave from 2001: A Space Odyssey,76 and Snakes trademark bandana The Deer Hunter77.

Film would also have an influence on other aspects of his games. Hal Otacon Emmerich named after HAL 9000 from 2001: A Space Odyssey and film director Roland Emmerich,76 Sniper Wolf shooting Meryl in Metal Gear Solid Full Metal Jacket,21 Psycho Mantis inspired from the film The Fury21 and the whole Metal Gear stealth concept The Great Escape21 and The Guns of Navarone78. James Bond also had a large influence on the Metal Gear series,79 with Metal Gear Solid 3 having a James Bondlike introduction sequence.

In an article he wrote for Official PlayStation 2 Magazine, Kojima described the influence of the film Dawn of the Dead on the Metal Gear series. The zombie classic inspired the maximum threedimensional use of a closed area like a shopping mall with elevators, air ducts, and escalators. These aspects are similar enough in his view that Metal Gear Solid is Dawn of the Dead if you replace soldiers with zombies.80

He also received inspiration from anime. His early works, particularly the cyberpunk adventure game Snatcher which uses animestyle art, were influenced by cyberpunk anime, most notably Akira mentioned above.74 In an interview, he mentioned that his Zone of the Enders series was inspired by mecharobot anime, such as Neon Genesis Evangelion. Mecha anime was also an inspiration for the Metal Gear series, which features mecha robots, such as Metal Gear REX and Metal Gear RAY; this is referenced in Metal Gear Solid, where Otacon mentions mecha anime as an influence on his Metal Gear REX designs.

In regards to storyline development and interaction with them, he said:

Storytelling is very difficult. But adding the flavor helps to relay the storytelling, meaning in a cut scene, with a set camera and effects, you can make the users feel sorrow, or make them happy or laugh. This is an easy approach, which we have been doing. That is one point, the second point is that if I make multiple storylines and allow the users to select which story, this might really sacrifice the deep emotion the user might feel; when theres a concrete storyline, and you kind of go along that rail, you feel the destiny of the story, which at the end, makes you feel more moved. But when you make it interactive  if you want multiple stories where you go one way or another  will that make the player more moved when he or she finishes the game? These two points are really the key which I am thinking about, and if this works, I think I could probably introduce a more interactive storytelling method.81
In terms of reverse influence on film, his work on the storylines of the Metal Gear series was cited as an influence by screenwriter David Hayter, the voice actor for Solid Snake, on his screenwriting for Hollywood films. He stated that Kojima and I have different styles ... but Ive certainly learned things from him, especially about ambiguity and telling a story without giving all the answers.82

Awards and accolades
Newsweek named Hideo Kojima as one of the top ten people of 2002.8384 In 2008, NextGen placed him seventh in their list of Hot 100 Developers 2008.85

In 2009, IGN placed him sixth in their list of top game creators of all time.86 At the 2008 MTV Game Awards, Hideo was given the award shows first Lifetime Achievement Award for a game designer and was also honored with a Lifetime Achievement Award at the 2009 Game Developers Conference.872

At the 2014 National Academy of Video Game Trade Reviewers NAVGTR awards, Kojima was credited for Metal Gear Solid V: Ground Zeroes nomination for the category Game, Franchise Adventure.88 In December 2015, Kojima was invited to accept an award from The Game Awards for Metal Gear Solid V: The Phantom Pain. However, Konami prevented him from attending the awards ceremony.89

In February 2016, Kojima received the AIAS Hall of Fame Award at 19th Annual D.I.C.E. Awards.90 In December 2016, Kojima was able to attend The Game Awards 2016 and accepted the Industry Icon Award.91

On October 12, 2017, Kojima received a Lifetime Achievement Award at the Brasil Game Show.92

Works
Metal Gear series
Further information: Metal Gear
YearGameCredited asSystems
DirectorProducerscreenWriterGame designer
1987Metal GearYesNoYesYesMSX2, Mobile phones, PlayStation 2, PlayStation 3, Xbox 360, PlayStation Vita
1990Metal Gear 2: Solid SnakeYesNoYesYesMSX2, Mobile phones, PlayStation 2, PlayStation 3, Xbox 360, PlayStation Vita
1998Metal Gear SolidYesYesYesYesPlayStation
1999Metal Gear Solid: IntegralYesYesYesYesPlayStation, Microsoft Windows
2000Metal Gear: Ghost BabelNoYesNoNoGame Boy Color
2001Metal Gear Solid 2: Sons of LibertyYesYesYesYesPlayStation 2
2002The Document of Metal Gear Solid 2YesYesNoNoPlayStation 2
Metal Gear Solid 2: SubstanceYesYesYesYesXbox, PlayStation 2, Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 3, Xbox 360, PlayStation Vita
2004Metal Gear Solid: The Twin SnakesNoYesYesNoNintendo GameCube
Metal Gear Solid 3: Snake EaterYesYesYesYesPlayStation 2
Metal Gear AcidNoYesNoNoPlayStation Portable
2005Metal Gear Acid 2NoYesNoNoPlayStation Portable
Metal Gear Solid 3: SubsistenceYesYesYesYesPlayStation 2, PlayStation 3, Xbox 360, PlayStation Vita
2006Metal Gear Solid: Digital Graphic NovelYesYesNoNoPlayStation Portable
Metal Gear Solid: Portable OpsNoYesNoNoPlayStation Portable
2007Metal Gear Solid: Portable Ops PlusNoYesNoNoPlayStation Portable
Metal Gear Solid 2: Bande DessineYesYesNoNoDVD
2008Metal Gear Solid MobileNoYesNoNoMobile phones
Metal Gear Acid MobileNoYesNoNoMobile phones
Metal Gear Solid 4: Guns of the Patriots  Metal Gear OnlineYesYesYesYesPlayStation 3
Metal Gear Online: Gene ExpansionNoYesNoNoPlayStation 3
Metal Gear Online: Meme ExpansionNoYesNoNoPlayStation 3
2009Metal Gear Online: Scene ExpansionNoYesNoNoPlayStation 3
Metal Gear Solid TouchNoYesNoNoiOS
2010Metal Gear ArcadeNoYesNoNoArcade
Metal Gear Solid: Peace WalkerYesYesYesYesPlayStation Portable, PlayStation 3, Xbox 360
2011Metal Gear Solid HD CollectionYesYesYesNoPlayStation 3, Xbox 360, PlayStation Vita
2012Metal Gear Solid: Snake Eater 3DYesYesYesNoNintendo 3DS
2013Metal Gear Rising: RevengeanceNoYesNoNoPlayStation 3, Xbox 360, Microsoft Windows
2014Metal Gear Solid V: Ground ZeroesYesYesYesYesPlayStation 4, PlayStation 3, Xbox One, Xbox 360, Microsoft Windows
2015Metal Gear Solid V: The Phantom PainYesYesYesYesPlayStation 4, PlayStation 3, Xbox One, Xbox 360, Microsoft Windows
SnatcherPolicenauts games
Snatcher 1988: PC88, MSX2  writer, designer
SD Snatcher 1990: MSX2  original writer
Snatcher CDROMantic 1992: PCEngine  writer, designer, director
Policenauts 1994: PC98, 1995: 3DO, 1996: PlayStation, 1996: Sega Saturn  writer, director
Sdatcher 2011: radio drama  planner, producer
Tokimeki Memorial series
Further information: Tokimeki Memorial series
Tokimeki Memorial Drama Series Vol. 1: Nijiiro no Seishun 1997: PlayStation, Sega Saturn  planner, producer, drama director
Tokimeki Memorial Drama Series Vol. 2: Irodori no Love Song 1998: PlayStation, Sega Saturn  planner, producer
Tokimeki Memorial Drama Series Vol. 3: Tabidachi no Uta 1999: PlayStation, Sega Saturn  executive director
Zone of the Enders series
Further information: Zone of the Enders series
Zone of the Enders 2001: PlayStation 2  producer, designer
Zone of the Enders: The 2nd Runner 2003: PlayStation 2, 2003: Special edition for PlayStation 2  producer
Zone of the Enders HD Collection 2012: PlayStation 3, Xbox 360  producer
Zone of the Enders: The 2nd Runner MARS 2018: PlayStation 4, Microsoft Windows  producer
Boktai series
Further information: Boktai series
Boktai: The Sun Is in Your Hand 2003: Game Boy Advance  game designer, producer
Boktai 2: Solar Boy Django 2004: Game Boy Advance  producer
Shin Bokura no Taiy: Gyakush no Sabata 2005: Game Boy Advance  producer
Lunar Knights 2006: Nintendo DS  producer
Castlevania series
Further information: Castlevania series
Castlevania: Lords of Shadow 2010: Xbox 360, PlayStation 3, Microsoft Windows  executive producer
Other games
Penguin Adventure 1986: MSX  assistant designer
Lost Warld 1986: MSX, cancelled  writer, director
D2 1999: Dreamcast  thanks
Beatmania series 19982002: PlayStation  console version producer
Beatmania IIDX series 20002002: PlayStation 2  console version producer 3rd style  6th style
Stock Trading Trainer : Kabutore 2006: Nintendo DS  producer
Kabushiki Baibai Trainer Kabutore! Next 2007: Nintendo DS  producer
Twelve Tender Killers 2008: mobile phones  producer
Gaitame Baibai Trainer: Kabutore FX 2009: Nintendo DS  producer
PT 2014: PlayStation 4  director
Silent Hills Cancelled: PlayStation 4  director
Death Stranding TBA: PlayStation 4  director, producer, designer, script
Acting roles
Policenauts 1994  AP Officer No. 2
Metal Gear Solid 1998  Himself voice only cameo in the Japanese version
Murder on the Eurasia Express 1998  cameo extra
Metal Gear Solid: Integral 1999  Genola
Versus 2000  cameo extra
Azumi 2003  cameo extra
Internet Pilot Drama Idea Spy 2.5 Daisakusen 2007  Idea Spy 2.5
Metal Gear Solid 4: Guns of the Patriots 2008  Voice of God Himself  Cameo appearance
Castlevania: Lords of Shadow 2010  The Chupacabra Japanese voice
Metal Gear Solid: Peace Walker 2010  Himself cameo appearance
Sdatcher 2011  Little John
Metal Gear Solid V: Ground Zeroes 2014  Himself cameo appearance
Metal Gear Solid V: The Phantom Pain 2015  Himself cameo appearance
Eleven Little Roosters 2017  Himself cameo appearance
Ultraman Orb: Im Borrowing the Power of Your Bonds! 2017  cameo extra93
References
 IGN: Hideo Kojima Biography. Archived from the original on November 16, 2007. Retrieved March 12, 2008.
 GDC 09: Kojima To Receive Lifetime Achievement Award. February 17, 2009. Archived from the original on February 21, 2009. Retrieved June 2, 2009.
 Paget, Mat November 17, 2016. Blocked From Attending Last Year, Hideo Kojima to Receive Award Next Month. GameSpot. Archived from the original on November 15, 2017. Retrieved November 17, 2016.
 D.I.C.E Special Awards. Archived from the original on February 2, 2017. Retrieved January 22, 2017.
 Hideo Kojima  video gamings first auteur  Screen Robot. Screen Robot. Archived from the original on April 18, 2016. Retrieved April 7, 2016.
 Announcement of Personnel Changes March 17, 2009. Konami. March 17, 2009. Archived from the original on May 6, 2009. Retrieved August 11, 2009.
 Hideo Kojima becomes VP of Konami Digital Entertainment. March 30, 2011. Retrieved October 20, 2018.
 Hideo Kojima. Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on June 21, 2018.
 Parkin, Simon. Hideo Kojima: video game dropout  interview part 1. The Guardian. Archived from the original on February 3, 2014. Retrieved January 31, 2014.
 Hideo Kojima Versus the Big Robots. EDGE Magazine 136: 6974. April 22, 2004.
An unofficial transcription is available on metalgearsolid.org 1
 Hall, Kenji May 6, 2009. Hideo Kojima: Gamings DesignerinChief. Business Week. Archived from the original on May 11, 2009. Retrieved August 7, 2009.
 ICONS: Hideo Kojima  Metal Gear Solid. Archived from the original on July 9, 2017. Retrieved March 13, 2008.
 G4TV Icons Hideo Kojima. Archived from the original on September 7, 2013. Retrieved March 13, 2008.
 Steven Kent May 18, 2003. Hideo Kojima Interview. GameSpy. Archived from the original on January 19, 2008. Retrieved March 12, 2008.
 Szczepaniak, John. Before They Were Famous. Retro Gamer. Imagine Publishing 35: 74.
 Kasavin, Greg March 21, 2005. Everything is Possible: Inside the Minds of Gamings Master Storytellers. GameSpot. p. 2. Archived from the original on September 29, 2007. Retrieved August 15, 2007.
 HIDEOKOJIMAEN May 26, 2014. However I was shocked when I first... Tweet. Archived from the original on February 22, 2018. Retrieved October 21, 2016  via Twitter.
 The Literary Source Material For Metal Gear Solid Archived November 18, 2016, at the Wayback Machine.
 Penguin Adventure at MobyGames
 Penguin Adventure Archived July 16, 2012, at Archive.is, GameSpot
 Steven Kent. Hideo Kojima: Game Guru, Movie Maniac. Archived from the original on November 3, 2005. Retrieved March 13, 2008.
 Kurt Kalata, Snatcher Archived July 21, 2016, at the Wayback Machine., Hardcore Gaming 101
 RetroActive: Metal Gear from 1UP.com. 1Up.com. Archived from the original on January 19, 2014.
 JUNKER HQ Interview with Jeremy Blaustein by Chris Barker. Archived from the original on October 29, 2007. Blaustein: As for Snatcher: Sega CD, I think that counting you and me, the game only sold a couple thousand units at most in the US. I know the Sega CD sucked and had no software available for it, but where was everyone when Snatcher came out!? Boy, was that embarrassing  having it fail so badly.
 Mark Ryan Sallee. Kojimas Legacy: We reflect on the influence of Hideo Kojimas 20 years in gaming. IGN. Archived from the original on July 13, 2011. Retrieved August 20, 2009.
 Paul Soth. GOTW: Metal Gear 2: Solid Snake. GameSpy. Archived from the original on October 16, 2008. Retrieved August 27, 2009.
 European date fixed for the action  RPG Last Rebellion Archived April 2, 2016, at the Wayback Machine. Translation, Jeuxvideo.com
 Konami: Policenauts for Saturn. Konami. Archived from the original on November 9, 1996. Retrieved August 11, 2009.
 Policenauts: Official Guide. pp. 118122. ISBN 4871888355.
 Junker HQ  Release: 82309, 12 PM EDT. Forums.junkerhq.net. Archived from the original on February 20, 2012. Retrieved June 18, 2012.
 Hideo Kojima Speaks. IGN. December 12, 2000. Archived from the original on August 31, 2011. Retrieved August 24, 2011.
 Kasavin, Greg November 13, 2001. Metal Gear Solid 2: Sons of Liberty Review. GameSpot. Archived from the original on August 9, 2009. Retrieved August 11, 2009.
 Metal Gear Solid 2 SellsIn 1.8 Million. IGN. November 28, 2001. Archived from the original on December 7, 2007. Retrieved August 11, 2009.
 Parish, Jeremy December 10, 2011. Metal Gear Solid 2: Gamings Greatest Con Job. 1UP.com. Archived from the original on August 6, 2012. Retrieved August 8, 2012.
 Parkin, Simon. Hideo Kojima: video game dropout  interview part 2. The Guardian. Archived from the original on February 3, 2014. Retrieved January 31, 2014.
 Super Smash Bros. Brawl revealed for Wii, featuring Solid Snake!. May 10, 2006. Archived from the original on April 23, 2008. Retrieved March 13, 2008.
 MGS Creator Received Death Threats. November 21, 2005. Archived from the original on October 23, 2012. Retrieved March 15, 2013.
 Nelson, Randy November 24, 2008. Hideo Kojima receives lifetime achievement award from MTV. Joystiq. Archived from the original on March 3, 2009. Retrieved August 7, 2009.
 Hideo Kojima: The Kikizo Interview 2009. Kikizo. April 15, 2009. Archived from the original on November 4, 2009. Retrieved August 7, 2009.
 Doree, Adam August 24, 2008. Hideo Kojima: The Kikizo Interview 2008. Kikizo. Archived from the original on November 5, 2009. Retrieved August 7, 2009.
 PSPonly MGS slated for 2010 release; fourplayer coop hinted. GameSpot. June 2, 2009. Archived from the original on August 3, 2009. Retrieved August 7, 2009.
 Robinson, Martin August 20, 2009. GC 2009: Hideo Kojima QA. IGN. Archived from the original on August 26, 2009. Retrieved August 20, 2009.
 Hideo Kojima Checks Metal Gear Risings Demo. Andriasang. May 15, 2012. Archived from the original on May 18, 2012. Retrieved May 15, 2012.
 Akerman, Nick February 22, 2013. Metal Gear Solid: Ground Zeroes will tackle many taboos, may not release in its current state. VG247. Archived from the original on February 25, 2013. Retrieved February 22, 2013.
 Rose, Mike. Konami Promotes Hideo Kojima To Vice President. Gamasutra. Archived from the original on August 26, 2014. Retrieved August 22, 2014.
 E3 2011 KONAMI Special Interview with Hideo Kojima on YouTube
 Kojima announced Snatcher radio show. Joystiq.com. Archived from the original on July 9, 2011. Retrieved July 9, 2011.
 Kojima And 5pb Collaboration Will Be A Game And Anime. Siliconera. Archived from the original on February 19, 2014.
 Ashcraft, Brian. Hideo Kojima is Making an Adventure Game. Kotaku. Archived from the original on February 1, 2014. Retrieved January 31, 2014.
 Game by Metal Gears Kojima, 5pbs Shikura Has Anime Plans. Anime News Network. Archived from the original on February 26, 2014. Retrieved January 31, 2014.
 Hideo Kojima expresses interest in Silent Hill. Heres how he could very easily make it better than its been in a decade. GamesRadar. Archived from the original on August 14, 2014.
 TwitLonger  When you talk too much for Twitter. Archived from the original on October 15, 2014.
 TwitLonger  When you talk too much for Twitter. Archived from the original on August 17, 2014.
 Policenauts, Silent Hill and a Metal Gear JRPG  an audience with Kojima. Eurogamer.net. September 27, 2012. Archived from the original on October 15, 2014.
 Michael McWhertor. Konami wants Hideo Kojima to make a Silent Hill game. Polygon. Archived from the original on January 2, 2015.
 Konami has asked Hideo Kojima to helm Silent Hill. Destructoid. Archived from the original on July 20, 2013.
 Twitch. Twitch. Archived from the original on August 8, 2014.
 Kojima Wants to Reboot Silent Hill, but Not Until Hes Ready for Daily Nightmares. Rely on Horror. Archived from the original on August 7, 2014.
 Kojima Twitch interview summary: discussing Japanese gaming industry, Portable Ops canonicity, and possibility of remakes. Metal Gear Informer. Archived from the original on July 29, 2014.
 Grayson, Nathan. Hideo Kojima and Guillermo del Toro Team Up for New Silent Hill. Kotaku. Archived from the original on August 15, 2014. Retrieved August 22, 2014.
 Tassi, Paul April 27, 2015. Silent Hill Lives, Silent Hills is Dead, And Konami Is Almost Certainly Dying Update. Archived from the original on April 27, 2015. Retrieved April 27, 2015.
 Metal Gear Solid V: The Phantom Pain Kojima Interview. GameTrailers. March 28, 2013. Archived from the original on March 31, 2013. Retrieved March 29, 2013.
 Brown, Peter; Crossley, Rob. Kojima Expected to Leave Konami After MGS5, Inside Source Confirms. Gamespot. Archived from the original on March 19, 2015. Retrieved March 19, 2015.
 YinPoole, Wesley. Konami announces plan for brand new Metal Gear series. Eurogamer. Archived from the original on March 21, 2015. Retrieved March 20, 2015.
 Matulef, Jeffrey. Hideo Kojima left Konami earlier this month  report. EuroGamer. Archived from the original on October 21, 2015. Retrieved October 27, 2015.
 Luke, Reilley. KONAMI BANS METAL GEAR SOLID 5 CREATOR KOJIMA FROM GAME AWARDS. IGN. Archived from the original on December 6, 2015. Retrieved December 4, 2015.
 Hideo Kojima confirms departure from Konami, forms new studio and partnership with Sony. Polygon. Archived from the original on December 16, 2015. Retrieved December 16, 2015.
 Crossley, Rob. Kojima Reveals New PS4 Project, Death Stranding. GameSpot. Retrieved June 14, 2016.
 Scimeca, Dennis. Metal Gear creator Hideo Kojima just launched his own YouTube channel. Daily Dot. Archived from the original on January 14, 2018. Retrieved January 13, 2018.
 Archived copy. Archived from the original on September 4, 2017. Retrieved January 5, 2018.
 John Szczepaniak February 2011. Portopia Renzoku Satsujin Jiken. Retro Gamer. Archived from the original on December 3, 2011. Retrieved March 16, 2011. Reprinted at John Szczepaniak. Retro Gamer 85. Hardcore Gaming 101. Archived from the original on April 12, 2011. Retrieved March 16, 2011.
 Interview: Hideo Kojima Talks About Metal Gear Solid Vs Humor, Violence and Finality. Time. Archived from the original on July 1, 2014.
 Blade Runners Influence on Videogames from. 1UP.com. Archived from the original on July 18, 2012. Retrieved June 18, 2012.
 Hopper, Ben February 20, 2001. Great Games  Snatcher. GameCritics.com. Archived from the original on October 21, 2011. Retrieved August 24, 2011.
 Snatcher Review. Siliconera.com. Archived from the original on July 18, 2012. Retrieved June 18, 2012.
 The Making of Metal Gear Solid 2: Sons of Liberty DVD packaged with European version of Metal Gear Solid 2: Sons of Liberty
 MGS15  2 in Japanese. Archived from the original on April 29, 2009. Retrieved August 7, 2009.  in Japanese
 MGS15  1 in Japanese. Archived from the original on July 8, 2009. Retrieved August 7, 2009.  in Japanese
 MGS15  3 in Japanese. Archived from the original on April 29, 2009. Retrieved August 7, 2009. 007 in Japanese
 Archived copy. Archived from the original on October 14, 2016. Retrieved April 3, 2016.
 Hideo Kojima: The Kikizo Interview 2008 Page 3. Kikizo. August 24, 2008. Archived from the original on October 9, 2011. Retrieved August 7, 2009.
 Fitch, Andrew May 7, 2008. Anime Expo: David Hayter Critical of Some MGS Moments. 1UP.com. Retrieved March 2, 2012.
 Mr. Kojima, Konami Videogame Designer Was Selected One of Ten Whos Next? of NEWSWEEK. January 22, 2002. Archived from the original on April 12, 2008. Retrieved March 31, 2008.
 Newsweek Names the Men and Women of 2002: 10 to Watch. December 23, 2001. Archived from the original on May 9, 2008. Retrieved March 13, 2008.
 The NextGen Hot 100 Developers 2008. February 19, 2008. Archived from the original on May 9, 2008. Retrieved March 25, 2008.
 IGN. IGN  6. Hideo Kojima. IGN. Archived from the original on April 2, 2010. Retrieved October 15, 2009.
 Hideo Kojima Lifetime Achievement. November 24, 2008. Archived from the original on November 25, 2010. Retrieved January 19, 2011.
 NAVGTR Awards 2014. National Academy of Video Game Trade Reviewers. Archived from the original on March 22, 2017.
 Konami stop Hideo Kojima attending The Game Awards. BBC. December 4, 2015. Archived from the original on May 16, 2016.
 DICE2016 Archived April 23, 2016, at the Wayback Machine., Academy of Interactive Arts  Sciences
 Campbell, Colin December 1, 2016. Kojima takes Game Awards stage in triumph. Archived from the original on December 2, 2016. Retrieved December 2, 2016.
 KojiPro2015EN November 6, 2017. Hideo Kojimas lifetime achievement... Tweet. Archived from the original on February 22, 2018. Retrieved December 8, 2017  via Twitter.
 Hideo Kojima Appears in Ultraman Orb Movie. The Tokusatsu Network. March 12, 2017. Archived from the original on March 13, 2017. Retrieved March 14, 2017.
External links
Wikiquote has quotations related to: Hideo Kojima
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Hideo Kojima.
Hideo Kojimas former blog
Hideo Kojima on IMDb
vte
Video games directed by Hideo Kojima
vte
Metal Gear franchise
Authority control Edit this at Wikidata
WorldCat Identities BNF: cb140662019 data ISNI: 0000 0000 5188 031X LCCN: nb2008026982 MusicBrainz: 964ead90629f402f905145ae2076d264 NDL: 00949597 NKC: xx0153740 VIAF: 66671040
P vip.svgBiography portalFlag of Japan.svgJapan portalWPVG icon 2016.svgVideo games portal
Categories: 1963 births20thcentury Japanese writers21stcentury Japanese writersAcademy of Interactive Arts  Sciences Hall of FameHideo KojimaJapanese video game designersJapanese video game directorsJapanese video game producersKonami peopleLiving peoplePeople from SetagayaScience fiction fansVideo game writersWriters from Tokyo

This is a good article. Follow the link for more information.
The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt
Game cover art, with Geralt pulling out a sword
DevelopersCD Projekt Red
PublishersCD Projekt
Directors
Konrad Tomaszkiewicz
Mateusz Kanik
Sebastian Stpie
Producers
Piotr Krzywonosiuk
Jdrzej Mrz
ArtistsMarian Chomiak
WritersMarcin Blacha
Composers
Marcin Przybyowicz
Mikolai Stroinski
SeriesThe Witcher
EngineREDengine 3
Platforms
Microsoft Windows
PlayStation 4
Xbox One
Release19 May 2015
GenresAction roleplaying
ModesSingleplayer
The Witcher 3: Wild Hunta is a 2015 action roleplaying game developed and published by CD Projekt. Based on The Witcher series of fantasy novels by Polish author Andrzej Sapkowski, it is the sequel to the 2011 game The Witcher 2: Assassins of Kings. Played in an open world with a thirdperson perspective, players control protagonist Geralt of Rivia, a monster hunter known as a witcher, who is looking for his missing adopted daughter on the run from the Wild Hunt: an otherworldly force determined to capture and use her powers. Players battle the games many dangers with weapons and magic, interact with nonplayer characters, and complete mainstory and side quests to acquire experience points and gold, which are used to increase Geralts abilities and purchase equipment. Its central story has several endings, determined by the players choices at certain points in the game.

Development began in 2011 and lasted for three and a half years. Voice recording took over two and a half years. The writing was infused with reallife aspects like moral ambiguity in a deliberate attempt to avoid simplification, impart authenticity, and reflect Sapkowskis novels. Europe was the basis of the games open world, with Poland, Amsterdam, and Scandinavia as its primary inspirations. REDengine 3 enabled the developer to create a complex story without compromising the game world. The music was composed by Marcin Przybyowicz and performed by the Brandenburg State Orchestra.

The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt was released worldwide for Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 4, and Xbox One on 19 May 2015. The game received critical acclaim, with praise of its gameplay, narrative, world design, combat, and visuals, although it received minor criticism due to technical issues, some of which were later patched. It received numerous Game of the Year awards, and is considered to be one of the greatest games of all time. The game was also a commercial success, shipping nearly ten million copies by March 2016. Two expansion packs, Hearts of Stone and Blood and Wine, were also released. A Game of the Year edition, with the base game, expansion packs and all downloadable content, was released in August 2016.


Contents
1Gameplay
2Synopsis
2.1Setting
2.2Plot
3Development
4Release
4.1Downloadable content
5Reception
5.1Sales
5.2Awards and accolades
6Notes
7References
8External links
Gameplay
File:The Witcher 3  Downwarren Gameplay Teaser.webm
The player controls the main character, Geralt, as they explore the game world
The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt is an action roleplaying game with a thirdperson perspective. Players control Geralt of Rivia, a monster hunter known as a Witcher.1 Geralt walks, runs, rolls and dodges, and for the first time in the series jumps, climbs and swims.23 He has a variety of weapons, including bombs, a crossbow and two swords one steel and one silver.4 The steel sword is used primarily to kill humans while the silver sword is more effective against creatures and monsters.5 Players can draw out, switch and sheathe their swords at will. There are two modes of melee attack; light attacks are fast but weak, and heavy attacks are slow and strong.6 Players can block and counter enemy attacks with their swords.4 Swords have limited endurance and require regular repair.7 In addition to physical attacks, Geralt has five magical signs at his disposal: Aard, Axii, Igni, Yrden and Quen.8 Aard prompts Geralt to unleash a telekinetic blast, Axii confuses enemies, Igni burns them, Yrden slows them down and Quen offers players a temporary, protective shield.9 The signs use stamina, and cannot be used indefinitely.10

Players can use mutagens to increase Geralts magic power. They lose health when they are attacked by enemies, although wearing armour can help reduce health loss. Health can be restored with meditation or consumables, such as food and potions.4 Players may also control Ciri, Geralts adoptive daughter who can teleport short distances, in certain parts of the game.11 It has responsive, advanced artificial intelligence AI and dynamic environments. The daynight cycle influences some monsters and their powers, as a werewolf becomes powerful during the night of a full moon.12 Players can learn about their enemies and prepare for combat by reading the ingame bestiary.13 When they kill an enemy, they can loot its corpse for valuables.13 Geralts witcher sense enables players to find objects of interest, including items that can be collected or scavenged.14 Items are stored in the inventory, which can be expanded by purchasing upgrades.13 Players can sell items to vendors15 or use them to craft potions and bombs.1617 They can visit blacksmiths to craft new weapons and armour with what they have gathered.18 The price of an item and the cost of crafting it depend on a regions local economy.3

The game focuses on narrative, and has a dialogue wheel which allows players to choose how to respond to nonplayer characters. Geralt must make decisions which change the state of the world and lead to 36 possible endings, affecting the lives of ingame characters.19 He can have a romantic relationship with some of the games female characters by completing certain quests.20 In addition to the main quests, books offer more information on the games world.13 Players can begin side quests after visiting a towns noticeboard.13 These side missions include Witcher Contracts elaborate missions requiring players to hunt monsters21 and Treasure Hunt quests, which reward players with toptier weapons or armour.13 Players earn experience points by completing missions.3 When a player earns enough experience, Geralts level increases and the player receives ability points.22 These points may be used on four skill trees: combat, signs, alchemy and general. Combat upgrades enhance Geralts attacks and unlock new fighting techniques; signs upgrades enable him to use magic more efficiently, and alchemy upgrades improve crafting abilities. General upgrades have a variety of functions, from raising Geralts vitality to increasing crossbow damage.10 The games open world is divided into several regions. Geralt can explore each region on foot or by transportation, such as a boat. Roach, his horse, may be summoned at will.23 Players can kill enemies with their sword while riding Roach,24 but an enemy presence may frighten the horse and unseat Geralt.13 Points of interest may be found on the map, and players receive experience points after completing minimissions in these regions.25 Players can discover Places of Power for additional ability points.26 Other activities include horse racing, boxing and card playing;2728 the cardplaying mechanic was later expanded into a standalone game.29

Synopsis
Setting
The game is set in the Continent, a fantasy world surrounded by parallel dimensions and extradimensional worlds. Humans, elves, dwarves, monsters and other creatures coexist on the Continent, but nonhumans are often persecuted for their differences. The Continent is caught up in a war between the empire of Nilfgaard30led by Emperor Emhyr var Emreis Charles Dance,31 who invaded the Northern Kingdoms30and Redania, ruled by King Radovid V.32 Several locations appear in The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt, including the Redanian cities of Novigrad and Oxenfurt, the no mans land of Velen, the city of Vizima former capital of the recentlyconquered Temeria, the Skellige islands home to several Vikinglike clans and the witcher stronghold of Kaer Morhen.32

The main character is the Witcher, Geralt of Rivia Doug Cockle,33 a monster hunter trained since childhood in combat, tracking and magic, and made stronger, faster and resistant to toxins by mutagens. He is aided by his lover, the powerful sorceresses Yennefer of Vengerberg Denise Gough,33 his former love interest Triss Merigold Jaimi Barbakoff,33 the bard Dandelion John Schwab, the dwarf warrior Zoltan Chivay Alexander Morton,3430 and Geralts Witcher mentor Vesemir William Roberts.3432 Geralt is spurred into action by the reappearance of his and Yennefers adopted daughter, Ciri Jo Wyatt.34 Ciri is a Source, born with innate and potentially vast magical abilities; after the apparent death of her parents, she was trained as a witcher while Yennefer taught her magic. She is unaware that the Emperor is her biological father; he sired her under an assumed name while he was subject to a curse.30 Ciri disappeared years before to escape the Wild Hunt, a group of spectral warriors led by the King of the Wild Hunt: the elf Eredin, from a parallel dimension.32

Plot
See also: Hearts of Stone and Blood and Wine
Geralt rejoins his longlost lover, Yennefer, in the town of White Orchard. Yennefer tells him that Emperor Emhyr has summoned him to the city of Vizima. Emhyr tasks Geralt with finding Ciri, who has recently been seen in several places. Ciri is a Child of the Elder Blood, the last heir to an ancient elfish bloodline with the power to manipulate space and time. Geralt first hears that Ciri was in Velen at Crows Perch, the Bloody Barons fort.35 The baron refuses to help, but Geralts acquaintance, the sorceress Keira Metz, tells him that an elfish mage was looking for Ciri. Keira directs Geralt to the Crones of Crookback Bog: malicious, ancient spirits living near Velen. The Crones say that they captured Ciri for the Wild Hunt before she escaped and have enslaved Anna, the barons missing wife. Geralt returns to the baron, who tells him that Ciri went to Novigrad.

He discovers that the Church of the Eternal Fire, a militant religious organization, is purging mages in Novigrad. Meeting his former lover, Triss Merigold, Geralt learns that Ciri had contacted his friend Dandelion. Geralt navigates Novigrads criminal underworld to rescue Dandelion, and learns that Ciri teleported to the Skellige archipelago. In Novigrad, Geralt may help Triss to free fugitive mages. He sails to Skellige and rejoins Yennefer, who has been investigating a magical explosion linked to Ciri. They track Ciri to the island of Lofoten, which has been attacked by the Wild Hunt. Geralt and Yennefer realise that Uma, a deformed, cursed creature at Crows Perch, was present after Ciris escape. Before leaving Skellige, Geralt can help determine who will rule Skellige after the kings death. Yennefer severs the magical bond between her and Geralt, giving him the option of affirming his love for her or ending their relationship.

They bring Uma to the witcher school of Kaer Morhen, where Yennefer removes his curse and transforms him into Avallach. He reveals that he teleported Ciri to the Isle of Mists to save her from the Lofoten attack. Geralt travels to the island and finds Ciri in a deathlike state, until she is awakened by Avallachs magic. She says that Eredins the King of the Wild Hunt homeworld is being destroyed by the White Frost, and he wants Ciris power to conquer the Continent. Ciri and Geralt teleport to Kaer Morhen, pursued by the Wild Hunt. After a brief reunion with Yennefer, Triss and Vesemir their witcher mentor, the Hunt attacks. Vesemir is killed protecting Ciri; her distress unleashes her Elder power, and Eredin and the Hunt retreat. Geralt, Yennefer, Triss, Ciri, and their allies conduct a funeral for Vesemir. Ciri and Geralt travel to Novigrad and help Triss and Yennefer reform the Lodge of Sorceresses to aid their fight.

They learn about the Sunstone, a relic which can lure Eredin out and bind him to a location. On the Skelligan island of Undvik, Avallach uses the Sunstone to draw out the Hunt and their fleet. Geralt, Ciri, their allies and the Nilfgaardian fleet battle the Hunt, and Geralt defeats Eredin in combat. As the White Frost descends on Skellige, Ciri insists that she must confront it with her Elder Blood before it consumes all life on every world. She enters a portal and defeats the White Frost, ending the threat. The game ending varies, depending on previous choices. If Ciri is alive, Geralt can retire with Yennefer or Triss or remain a lone witcher. If Geralt helps Nilfgaard win the war and brings Ciri to meet the emperor, she will become empress; if Ciri does not meet the emperor, Geralt fakes her death and she becomes a witcher. If Ciri dies fighting the White Frost, Geralt hunts down her stolen medallion as a keepsake; surrounded by monsters when he finds it, his fate is unknown.

Development
File:The Witcher 3  World Setting Gamescom Dev Diary.webm
The developers, on creating the games world
Although the game was planned to begin production in 2008, CD Projekt Reds preoccupation with Rise of the White Wolf pushed it back to 2011.36 The company developed The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt with a selffunded budget of US81 millionb over threeandahalf years. The project began with 150 employees, eventually growing to over 250 inhouse staff. Fifteen hundred people were involved in the games production globally. While the game is based on Sapkowskis novels, his involvement with the game was limited to the creation of its ingame map.40 It was localised in 15 languages, with a total of 500 voice actors.414243 The game was scripted concurrently in Polish and English to alleviate difficulty in localisation.44 According to Side the company which handled voice casting and recording, the 450,000word script had 950 speaking roles. The voices were recorded from late 2012 to early 2015.45 CD Projekt Red wanted The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt to be free of any digital rights management DRM due to the developers unsuccessful control of piracy with its predecessor, The Witcher 2: Assassins of Kings, whose DRM also made it run slowly.46

The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt was created with the REDengine 3, CD Projekt Reds proprietary game engine designed for nonlinear roleplaying video games set in open world environments,47 aided by the PlayStation 4 and Xbox One consoles and prepared for use in October 2014. The first playthrough indicated to the developers that the open world, despite its content and generation around the quests, seemed empty. As a solution, they added points of interest. The game had 5,000 bugs that December, which with a launch date of February 2015 necessitated its postponement.3648 Like the previous two Witcher games, players are given a complex story with multiple choices and consequences. Unlike other game engines, REDengine 3 permits a complex storyline without sacrificing virtual world design.49 The user interface was made more intuitive with gridbased solutions. The camera system was improved to use long shots for battles with multiple enemies and closeups for moreintimate confrontations.50 More animations were used for combat sequences than in The Witcher 2, with each lasting less than one second for quick succession.51 Game director Konrad Tomaszkiewicz and senior game designer Damien Monnier cited Dark Souls and Demons Souls as influences on Wild Hunts combat system,5253 and level designer Miles Tost and senior environment artist Jonas Mattsson cited The Legend of Zelda series and Red Dead Redemption as influencing the games level designs and environments.54

Months before its release date, the games economy, crafting, and inventory systems were incomplete and apparently unable to meet the deadline. Senior gameplay designer Matthew Steinke thought of a remedy and drew up a system context diagram. To allocate prices, Steinke wrote a formula based on rate of damage, defence, or healing. Polynomial least squares were used to determine its efficacy, and it was found to eliminate bugs from the system and reduce loading times.55 Each character was given a unique personality to contrast the fetchquest system typically used in video games. It was decided early that the writing would be witty, with metaphors and implied meanings. Dialogue was limited to 15 lines, with occasional exceptions, to retain content originality. Player options were written as morally ambiguous, reflecting real life and Andrzej Sapkowskis original Witcher series. Alcoholism, abuse and sexuality, depicted as normal parts of the medieval world, were incorporated into the story for authenticity.364844 Areas of the open world were based on Poland, Amsterdam, and Scandinavia.44 Objects on the games levels were modelled by hand.48

Storylines such as Yennefer imprisoning Geralt on an island and Geralts covert recruitment to the Wild Hunt were discarded to make the game smaller and avoid splitting it into two parts. The card game Gwent was preceded by other minigame proposals, including a drinking game, knife throwing, and ice skating.36 A reenactment of the Battle of Grunwald was recorded for the sounds of battle, marching, blacksmithing, and the firing of arrows. Recording the knights voices for postprocessing, the speakers wore helmets for an authentic sound. Marcin Przybyowicz was the games music director and composer, with additional music contributed by Polish folk band Percival because their instruments were older. According to Przybyowicz, working with Percival was a challenge; he expected an academic approach before learning that most of the group were not formally trained, and much of the music was improvised. Multiinstrumentalist Robert Jaworski of the folk band ywioak recorded lute, Renaissance fiddle, bowed gusle, and hurdygurdy sections. The score was performed in Frankfurt Oder by the Brandenburg State Orchestra, conducted by Bernd Ruf.56

Release
File:The Witcher 3  Standard Edition Unboxing Official Trailer.webm
Unboxing video
The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt was announced on 4 February 2013 in Game Informer, with a 2014 release for PC and all highend platforms available;57 the latter were clarified as the PlayStation 4 and Xbox One.5859 The games release date was later delayed from the third quarter of 2014 to February 2015.60 After missing its planned release date of 24 February,6162 CD Projekt Red confirmed in April that the game was released to manufacturing.63 The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt was released worldwide on 19 May 2015.61 It was distributed to retailers by Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment in North America and Bandai Namco Entertainment in Western Europe, Australia and New Zealand.6465 In addition to the standard edition, players can also purchase the Collectors Edition, which includes the base game and items such as an artbook, a statue of Geralt fighting against a griffin, and a Witcher medallion.66 Polish Prime Minister Ewa Kopacz and President Bronisaw Komorowski visited the CD Projekt Red to celebrate the launch.36

CD Projekt Red cofounder Marcin Iwinski listed three pillars that he considered integral to marketing: game quality, a gamercentric value proposition, and communication with fans. To achieve the second, The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt was marketed as Skyrim in a Game of Thrones sauce.67 The third explained in detail the visual downgrade from earlier promotional footage to the finished product, which Iwinski thought effective.67 The logo was redesigned to make it less obvious that The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt was a sequel; the number three suggested a claw mark or mask to an audience unfamiliar with the series, while fans would recognise it as the mark of the Wild Hunt.68

Downloadable content
The developer studied Witcher forums and websites such as Reddit to predict what players generally desired from downloadable content DLC, shaping it to meet their criteria. A collection of 16 free DLC was released, as announced before release by the developers. They included cosmetic and additional gameplay content and the New Game Plus mode.4669 CD Projekt Red announced two expansion packs: Hearts of Stone and Blood and Wine. Hearts of Stone was released on 13 October 2015,70 and Blood and Wine on 31 May 2016.71 Hearts of Stone follows Geralt as he contacts a mysterious entity known as the Man of Glass and an immortal man, Olgierd von Everec. The expansion was critically acclaimed, rated a 910 by IGN and GameSpot.7273 The second expansion pack, Blood and Wine, follows Geralt as he travels to Toussaint a Nilfgaardian duchy untouched by war to track down a mysterious beast which is terrorizing the region. It was also critically acclaimed, winning the Best RPG category at The Game Awards 2016.74 A Game of the Year edition, with the base game, both expansions and all DLC, was released on 30 August 2016.75

Reception
Reception
Aggregate score
AggregatorScore
MetacriticPC 9310076
PS4 9210077
XONE 9110078
Review scores
PublicationScore
Destructoid81079
Game Informer9.751080
Game Revolution3.55 stars81
GameSpot101082
GamesRadar45 stars83
GameTrailers9.81084
IGN9.31085
PC Gamer US9210086
Polygon81087
VideoGamer.com91088
The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt received universal acclaim, according to review aggregator Metacritic.767778 Critics agreed that it was an ambitious action roleplaying game which was grand in scale,858779 but marred by technical difficulties8883 and a lack of innovation.86 GameSpot and Eurogamer gave the game their highest rating.8289 The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt has been considered one of the best roleplaying games of all time.909192 The game world received widespread praise from critics. Kimberly Wallace of Game Informer called it immersive, and was impressed by its attention to detail.80 Destructoids Chris Carter praised its size, which he found enormous and would take players hours to explore.79 Jonathon Leack, writing for Game Revolution, praised the games effective use of its large world. Leack wrote that every region had quests and activities for players to try, although he thought that much was filler which extended its length.81 Tom Senior of GamesRadar praised the open worlds variety, describing it as an exciting realization of the Ronin fantasy.83 GameTrailers Daniel Bloodworth praised the game for encouraging exploration; many quests would only become available to players after they met nonplayable characters in different parts of the world.84 Vince Ingenito of IGN and Shaun Prescott of PC Gamer were impressed by the games scenery and its daynight cycle,86 with Ingenito saying that it highlighted the game worlds authenticity.85

Its narrative also received critical acclaim. Carter praised the games cast of characters, which he called unique and interesting. He considered the narrative more involving, with players witnessing key events and making consequential choices.79 Wallace praised the games dialogue and its sidequests; each was similar to a short story, and player decisions in the quests would influence the state of the world. She liked the games main quest, which added more character to Geralt, and said that the romance options were a significant improvement over its predecessors. However, she was disappointed with the quality of the games endings.80 Kevin Van Ord of GameSpot echoed Wallace, noting that The Witcher 3: Wild Hunts story had more characterisation for Geralt than the previous games. He welcomed the change, since it gave players emotional connections to the ingame characters.82 Senior enjoyed the games sidequests, calling them a compilation of dark fantasy short stories which overshadowed the main quests.83 Ingenito was disappointed with the games main story, saying that there was too much padding and too many dull quests.85 PC Gamers Shaun Prescott agreed, saying that the narrative would have felt rote if the side content was not engaging.86 Van Ord, Wallace and Brett Phipps of VideoGamer.com praised the voice acting,8882 with Wallace calling it the series best.80 Arthur Gies from Polygon criticized that some of the female characters are overly sexualized and that there are no people of colour in the main game.87

The games combat had a generallypositive reception. Bloodworth found Geralt more mobile and agile with the new climbing and swimming mechanic.84 Carter said that it was significantly streamlined and its predecessors strategic elements removed, but appreciated its action.79 Wallace wrote that with a simplified alchemy system, a decent user interface and diverse difficulty settings the combat was more accessible, although she disliked the disruptive weapondegradation system and unrefined crossbow shooting mechanic.80 Leack thought the system lacked complexity and criticised its lack of polish, caused by the unreliable lockon system, camera issues and excessivelylong combat animation.81 Senior noted that some gameplay mechanics, such as rolling and dodging, were inconsistent and made the system feel unfair.83 Ingenito praised the combat, describing its fluidity as a significant improvement over its predecessors.85

Other gameplay aspects received mixed reviews. Van Ord praised the games customisation and upgrade system which offered players a sense of progression, since it hardened as the story unfolded.82 Ingenito called its upgrade system deep and flexible, since players have considerable freedom when customising Geralts skills.85 Leack disliked the upgrade system, calling it unexciting.81 Carter was disappointed with the Witcher Senses which he found repetitive,79 but Senior considered them superior to objective markersthe norm for roleplaying games.83 Prescott disliked the user interface for its clumsiness and tedium.86 Senior found the Gwent card game an addictive minigame.83

The game was criticised for its technical issues. Carter called its climbing animations stiff, noting that some gameplay bugs would hinder player progress.79 According to Wallace, the games load times were too long.80 Leack noted that the game had a graphic downgrade, and the actual game did not look as good as the 2013 demonstration.81 Senior, Phipps and Ingenito noted frame rate issues;83 although Ingenito thought it did not impact the gameplay,85 Phipps called it a persistent problem which overshadowed many of the games achievements.88

Sales
Before its release, over 1.5 million people preordered the game.93 The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt debuted atop the UK software sales chart in its first week, when it earned 600 percent more than predecessor The Witcher 2: Assassins of Kings. It was the bestselling video game of the year in the UK, breaking the record held by Battlefield Hardline.94 It debuted atop the Japanese videogame sales charts, selling 67,385 copies in its first week.95 Four million copies of the game were sold in its first two weeks of release.96 By June 2015, over 690,000 players had activated the game through GOG Galaxy.9798 The game sold over six million copies in the next six weeks,43 and the studio made a profit of 63.3 million in the first half of 2015.99 In March 2016, CD Projekt Red reported that the game had shipped nearly 10 million copies worldwide.100 By the end of 2017, the series as a whole had sold over 33 million.101102

Awards and accolades
Three men onstage at Game of the Year awards
Marcin Iwiski, one of the founders of CD Projekt, accepting the Game of the Year award at the 2016 Game Developers Choice Awards
Main article: List of accolades received by The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt
The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt received prerelease awards at E3 in 2013 and 2014. It was voted the best roleplaying game at the IGN Best of E3 Awards in 2013 and 2014.103104 It won IGNs E3 Peoples Choice Award in 2013 and 2014, GameSpots E3 Peoples Choice Award in 2014,105106 as and the Most Wanted Award at the 31st and 32nd Golden Joystick Awards.107108 It was the Most Anticipated Game at the Game Awards 2014 in Las Vegas.109 At release it received over 250 game of the year titles, the most awarded at the time.110 By August 2016, it had received over 800 awards.111

Its accolades are from several events, including the Golden Joystick Awards,112 The Game Awards,113 D.I.C.E. Awards,114 Game Developers Choice Awards,115 SXSW Gaming Awards116 and the National Academy of Video Game Trade Reviewers NAVGTR awards.117 The Witcher 3 was recognized as game of the year by IGN,118 GameSpot,119 Game Informer120 and other gaming publications.121122123 The game received a Golden Joystick Award for Best Storytelling, Best Visual Design and Best Gaming Moment,124 and the Game Awards for Best RolePlaying Game and Studio of the Year for CD Projekt Red.125 It won Outstanding Achievement in Game Design, Outstanding Technical Achievement and Outstanding Achievement in Story at the D.I.C.E. Awards,126 and won the Game of the Year and Best Technology awards at the 16th Annual Game Developers Choice Awards.127

Notes
 Polish: Wiedmin 3: Dziki Gon
 Reports conflict on the exact figure. The total was estimated at 6781 million, with 12.232.4 million for production and an additional 2535 million for marketing.373839
References
 Lear, Jack 18 May 2015. A Witcher Primer: What You Need To Know To Play The Witcher 3. Polygon. Archived from the original on 27 May 2015.
 The Witcher 3 Wild Hunt Game Manual PDF. CD Projekt Red. 15 May 2015. Archived PDF from the original on 17 June 2017.
 Purchese, Robert 1 March 2013. The Witcher 3: no QTEs, a 50hour quest, no XP for killing, only for quests. Eurogamer. Archived from the original on 17 June 2017.
 Phipps, Brett 1 June 2015. The Witcher 3 Guide  Combat Basics for Beginners. VideoGamer.com. Archived from the original on 17 June 2017.
 CD Projekt Red 19 May 2015. The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt. Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 4, Xbox One. CD Projekt.
 Dunsmore, Kevin 26 January 2017. The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt is the Most Ambitious RPG Yet. Hardcore Gamer. Archived from the original on 17 June 2017.
 Leack, Jonathon 19 May 2015. Becoming Unstoppable: The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt Tips Guide UPDATED. Game Revolution. Archived from the original on 17 June 2017.
 VanOrd, Kevin 18 May 2015. The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt Magical Signs Guide. GameSpot. Archived from the original on 25 May 2015.
 The Witcher 3 guide. Eurogamer. 2 November 2016. Archived from the original on 17 June 2017.
 Hawkins, Josh 19 May 2015. The Witcher 3  How to Use Skills, Signs and Magic. USgamer. Archived from the original on 11 June 2016.
 Karmali, Luke 15 December 2014. The Witcher 3 Wild Hunt Will Let You Play As Ciri. IGN. Archived from the original on 17 December 2014.
 OXM Staff 25 February 2015. Why Geralt has cheered up for The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt. GamesRadar. Archived from the original on 26 February 2015.
 Hamilton, Kirk 19 May 2015. Tips For Playing The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt. Kotaku. Archived from the original on 13 June 2015.
 Dawson, Bryan 15 June 2015. The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt Prologue  Kill the Griffin, Voorhis Conversation Options. Prima Games. Archived from the original on 17 June 2017.
 Lavoy, Bill 27 May 2015. How to Earn More Crowns in The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt. Prima Games. Archived from the original on 17 June 2017.
 The Witcher 3  Alchemy: potions, bombs, decoctions, oils, substances, ingredients. Eurogamer. 2 November 2016. Archived from the original on 17 June 2017.
 The Witcher 3  crafting: components, repair kits, Glyphs and Runestones. Eurogamer. 2 November 2016. Archived from the original on 17 June 2017.
 Lavoy, Bill 3 June 2015. The Witcher 3 Bear and Ursine School Gear. USgamer. Archived from the original on 17 June 2017.
 Hillier, Brenna 22 December 2015. The Witcher 3: How to get the best ending. VG247. Archived from the original on 21 January 2017.
 Buffa, Christopher 18 May 2015. The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt  Carnal Knowledge and Romance Guide. Prima Games. Archived from the original on 17 June 2017.
 Hillier, Brenna 25 May 2015. The Witcher 3: Mysterious Tracks Witcher Contract. VG247. Archived from the original on 17 June 2017.
 Dyer, Mitch 13 April 2015. Slaughtering With Signs: The Magic of The Witcher 3 Wild Hunt. IGN. Archived from the original on 22 August 2015.
 Carter, Chris 19 May 2015. Very Quick Tips: The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt. Destructoid. Archived from the original on 17 June 2017.
 Saed, Sherif 3 June 2015. 12 things you didnt know you could do in The Witcher 3. VG247. Archived from the original on 17 June 2017.
 Haywald, Justin 25 April 2015. How the Side Quests in the Witcher 3 Can Change the Whole Story. GameSpot. Archived from the original on 26 April 2015.
 The Witcher 3  Places of Power: where to find all fifteen. Eurogamer. 29 August 2016. Archived from the original on 17 June 2017.
 Hamilton, Kirk 26 May 2015. The Witcher 3 Is Even Bigger Than You Think. Kotaku. Archived from the original on 21 August 2015.
 Hillier, Brenna 29 May 2015. The Witcher 3: Collect Em All  How to get every Gwent card. VG247. Archived from the original on 29 May 2015.
 Cryer, Hirun 6 June 2017. Gwent Guide  Tips and Tricks, How to Play Gwent, How to Win at Gwent, How to Get Scrap. USgamer. Archived from the original on 17 June 2017.
 Fenlon, Wes 18 May 2015. The Witcher 3 story primer: catch up on the essentials. PC Gamer. Archived from the original on 19 May 2015.
 Pinchefsky, Carol 29 June 2016. 10 Geek Actors Who Do StandOut Video Game Voice Acting. Syfy. Archived from the original on 25 June 2017.
 Hamilton, Kirk 18 May 2015. A Beginners Guide To The World Of The Witcher. Kotaku. Archived from the original on 20 May 2015.
 Purchese, Robert 27 January 2017. The voice behind The Witcher. Eurogamer. Archived from the original on 28 January 2017.
 CD Projekt Red 19 May 2015. The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt. Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 4, Xbox One. CD Projekt. Scene: Credits.
 Kelly, Andy 2 October 2015. How The Witcher 3s best quest was made. PC Gamer. Archived from the original on 26 December 2017. Retrieved 26 December 2017.
 Purchese, Robert 30 August 2016. I was there when The Witcher 3 launched. Eurogamer. Archived from the original on 21 August 2015.
 Their, Dave 10 June 2015. The Witcher 3s Business Model Is A Revolution. Forbes. Archived from the original on 22 September 2017.
 Williams, Mike 10 June 2015. The Witcher 3s Development Was Cheaper, But Still in AAA Territory. USgamer. Archived from the original on 22 September 2017.
 Chalk, Andy 9 September 2015. The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt cost 81 million to make. PC Gamer. Archived from the original on 31 January 2016.
 Draug 31 October 2017. The Witcher 3: Wild Gon  Compendium of Knowledge Update  30: Support for PS4 Pro, Devils Pit Mod and more. Gry Online. Retrieved 11 November 2017.
 Chapple, Craig 10 June 2015. The wild road to The Witcher 3. Develop. Archived from the original on 9 May 2016.
 Makuch, Eddie 9 September 2015. This is How Much The Witcher 3 Cost to Make. GameSpot. Archived from the original on 11 June 2017.
 Purchese, Robert 26 August 2015. The Witcher 3 sells 6m copies in six weeks. Eurogamer. Archived from the original on 26 August 2015.
 Suellentrop, Chris 15 March 2017. Witcher Studio Boss Marcin Iwinski: We Had No Clue How To Make Games. Glixel. Archived from the original on 16 March 2017.
 Stein, Zack 29 May 2015. This Is How Big the Script Was for The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt. IGN. Archived from the original on 30 May 2015.
 Klepek, Patrick 14 October 2015. The Past, Present, And Future Of The Witcher 3. Kotaku. Archived from the original on 15 October 2015.
 The amazing technology of The Witcher 3. PC Gamer. 18 May 2015. Archived from the original on 17 June 2017.
 Klepek, Patrick 6 October 2015. How The Witcher 3s Developers Ensured Their Open World Didnt Suck. Kotaku. Archived from the original on 7 October 2015.
 Rossignol, Jim 1 February 2013. So REDEngine 3 For The Witcher 3?. Rock, Paper, Shotgun. Archived from the original on 17 June 2017.
 Wilde, Tyler 30 July 2013. The Witcher 3 interview: A good quest isnt about the sheer number of outcomes. PC Gamer. Archived from the original on 17 June 2017.
 Gibson, Sean 19 June 2013. The Witcher 3 Game Director Konrad Tomaszkiewicz Interview. Gaming Illustrated. Archived from the original on 17 June 2017.
 Purchese, Robert 28 November 2013. The Witcher 3: What is a nextgen RPG?. Eurogamer. Archived from the original on 11 June 2017.
 Jones, Gary 30 March 2015. Witcher 3: Why Dark Souls has proved a big influence, new details on 200 hours gameplay. Daily Express. Archived from the original on 11 June 2017.
 Pena, Danny 27 April 2015. Episode 478  The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt Interview with CD Projekt Red. Gamertag Radio. Archived from the original on 11 June 2017.
 Walton, Mark 4 August 2015. How The Witcher 3s economy was saved by polynomial least squares. Ars Technica. Archived from the original on 4 August 2015.
 Makuch, Eddie 30 August 2016. How The Witcher 3s Amazing Music and Sound Effects Were Made. GameSpot.
 Biessener, Adam 4 February 2013. March Cover Revealed: The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt. Game Informer. Archived from the original on 15 April 2015.
 Kato, Matthew 21 February 2013. The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt Confirmed For PlayStation 4. Game Informer. Archived from the original on 25 October 2013.
 Langshaw, Mark 10 June 2013. The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt confirmed for Xbox One  E3 2013. Digital Spy. Archived from the original on 22 September 2017.
 Release Date of The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt  An Open Letter. CD Projekt Red. 11 March 2014. Archived from the original on 23 January 2018.
 Karmali, Luke 8 December 2014. The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt release date delayed again. IGN. Archived from the original on 29 March 2015.
 McWhertor, Michael 5 June 2014. The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt coming Feb. 24, 2015 in standard and collectors editions. Polygon. Archived from the original on 20 January 2015.
 Kato, Matthew 16 April 2015. The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt Has Gone Gold. Game Informer. Archived from the original on 16 April 2015.
 NAMCO BANDAI to promote The Witcher 3 in Australia and New Zealand. CD Projekt. 16 January 2014. Archived from the original on 11 June 2017.
 NAMCO BANDAI to distribute The Witcher 3 in Western Europe. CD Projekt. 28 October 2013. Archived from the original on 11 June 2017.
 Struan, John 6 June 2014. Heres The 150 The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt Collectors Edition. Kotaku. Retrieved 11 November 2017.
 Leone, Matt 18 March 2016. The Witcher 3 developer on talking to fans: The worst thing is silence. Polygon. Archived from the original on 18 March 2016.
 Crawley, Dan 29 May 2015. Dont see the 3 in The Witcher 3: Wild Hunts logo? Theres a good reason for that. GamesBeat. Archived from the original on 20 September 2017.
 The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt Free DLC Announcement  GOG.com. GOG.com. CD Projekt. 6 November 2014. Archived from the original on 8 November 2014.
 Krupa, Daniel 7 April 2015. 2 Massive Expansions Announced for The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt. IGN. Archived from the original on 7 April 2015.
 Skrebels, Joe 10 May 2016. Update: The Witcher 3: Blood and Wine DLC Gets an Official Release Date. IGN. Archived from the original on 11 June 2017.
 Ingenito, Vince 8 October 2015. The Witcher 3: Hearts of Stone Review. IGN. Archived from the original on 9 October 2015.
 Mahardy, Mike 8 October 2015. The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt  Hearts of Stone Review. GameSpot. Archived from the original on 8 October 2015.
 Osborn, Alex 2 December 2016. The Game Awards 2016 Winner Announced. IGN. Archived from the original on 2 December 2016.
 Donnelly, Joe 11 August 2016. The Witcher 3: Game of the Year Edition is out this month. PC Gamer. Archived from the original on 11 June 2017.
 The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt for PC Reviews. Metacritic. Archived from the original on 11 June 2017.
 The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt for PlayStation 4 Reviews. Metacritic. Archived from the original on 11 June 2017.
 The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt for Xbox One Reviews. Metacritic. Archived from the original on 11 June 2017.
 Carter, Chris 12 May 2015. Review: The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt. Destructoid. Archived from the original on 15 May 2015.
 Wallace, Kimberley 12 May 2015. Choice On A Grand Scale  The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt  PlayStation 4. Game Informer. Archived from the original on 12 May 2015.
 Leack, Jonathan 20 May 2015. The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt Review. Game Revolution. Archived from the original on 30 May 2015.
 VanOrd, Kevin 12 May 2015. The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt Review. GameSpot. Archived from the original on 9 June 2015.
 Senior, Tom 12 May 2015. The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt review. GamesRadar. Archived from the original on 26 January 2015.
 Bloodworth, Daniel 12 May 2015. The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt Review. GameTrailers. Archived from the original on 15 May 2015.
 Ingenito, Vince 12 May 2015. The Witcher 3: The Wild Hunt Review. IGN. Archived from the original on 12 May 2015.
 Prescott, Shaun 21 May 2015. The Witcher 3 PC review. PC Gamer. Archived from the original on 8 April 2017.
 Gies, Arthur 13 May 2015. The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt review: off the path. Polygon. Archived from the original on 5 April 2017.
 Phipps, Brett 12 May 2015. The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt Review. VideoGamer.com. Archived from the original on 27 June 2015.
 Welsh, Oli 30 August 2016. The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt review. Eurogamer. Archived from the original on 19 May 2015.
 Arnold, Cory 20 July 2017. What is the best RPG of all time? Japanese gamers say Persona 5. Destructoid. Archived from the original on 21 July 2017.
 The best RPGs of all time. PC Gamer. 22 December 2016. Archived from the original on 25 September 2017.
 Top 100 RPGs of All Time. IGN. Archived from the original on 7 May 2017.
 Scammell, David 19 May 2015. The Witcher 3 preorders grew to 1.5 million in last week. VideoGamer.com. Archived from the original on 19 July 2015.
 Phillips, Tom 26 May 2015. The Witcher 3 biggest UK launch of 2015 so far. Eurogamer. Archived from the original on 26 May 2015.
 Japans Video Game Rankings, May 1824. Anime News Network. 28 May 2015. Archived from the original on 2 June 2015.
 Purchese, Robert 9 June 2015. The Witcher 3 sells 4m copies in two weeks. Eurogamer. Archived from the original on 9 June 2015.
 News: GOG Galaxy home to over half of The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt PC gamers. GOG.com. 12 June 2015. Archived from the original on 11 June 2015.
 Newhouse, Alex 11 June 2015. More People Playing Witcher 3 on GOG than on Steam  CD Projekts digital distribution service edges out Steam and all other PC platforms. GameSpot. Archived from the original on 11 June 2015.
 Romano, Sal 26 August 2015. The Witcher 3 sold six million in six weeks. Gematsu. Archived from the original on 21 September 2017.
 Makuch, Eddie 11 March 2016. Witcher 3 Ships Almost 10 Million Copies  Report. GameSpot. Archived from the original on 13 March 2016.
 Harradence, Mike 22 March 2018. The Witcher series has sold over 33 million copies worldwide. VideoGamer.com. Archived from the original on 3 July 2018.
 Witcher Series Sells Over 33 Million Copies in 10 Years; Witcher 3 2017 PC Sales Equal PS4XO Sales. Wccftech. 23 March 2018. Archived from the original on 3 July 2018.
 Altano, Brian 11 June 2013. IGNs Best of E3 2013 Awards. IGN. Archived from the original on 11 July 2014.
 IGNs E3 Crew 12 June 2014. IGNs Best of E3 2014 Awards. IGN. Archived from the original on 11 July 2014.
 Abbott, Chris 16 June 2014. E3 2014: Peoples Choice Award Winner. IGN. Archived from the original on 12 August 2014.
 Haywald, Justin 25 June 2014. Best of E3 2014: Peoples Choice Award Winners Announced. GameSpot. Archived from the original on 12 August 2014.
 GamesRadar Staff 25 October 2013. Here are your Golden Joystick Award winners 2013. GamesRadar. Archived from the original on 1 March 2015.
 Golden Joysticks Awards Ultimate List of Ultimate Games: 1983  2015. GamesRadar. 15 October 2015. Archived from the original on 17 March 2016.
 Witcher 3: Wild Hunt is Most Anticipated Game, new trailer released!. CD Projekt Red. 6 December 2014. Archived from the original on 9 December 2014.
 Leack, Jonathan 17 March 2016. The Witcher 3 Has Won More Game of the Year Awards Than Any Other Game. Game Revolution. Archived from the original on 17 March 2016.
 Wiedmin 3: Dziki Gon  data premiery Edycji Gry Roku. The Witcher in Polish. 11 August 2016. Archived from the original on 11 June 2017.
 Hurley, Leon 30 October 2015. The Golden Joystick Awards: all the winners this year. GamesRadar. Archived from the original on 30 October 2015.
 Sarkar, Samit 3 December 2015. Here are the winners of The Game Awards 2015. Polygon. Archived from the original on 4 December 2015.
 Pereira, Chris 19 February 2016. The 2016 DICE Award Winners UPDATED. GameSpot. Archived from the original on 19 February 2016.
 Staff 16 March 2016. Witcher 3 wins Game of the Year at 16th annual Game Developers Choice Awards. Game Developers Conference. Archived from the original on 24 September 2017.
 Sarkar, Samit 21 March 2016. The Witcher 3 takes top honors at yet another award show, the SXSW Gaming Awards. Polygon. Archived from the original on 21 March 2016.
 2015 Winners. National Academy of Video Game Trade Reviewers. 21 March 2016. Archived from the original on 24 September 2017.
 Game of the Year  IGNs Best of 2015. IGN. Archived from the original on 10 January 2016.
 Game of the Year 2015 Countdown: 5  1. GameSpot. Archived from the original on 21 December 2015.
 Marchiafava, Jeff 6 January 2016. Game Informer Best Of 2015 Awards. Game Informer. Archived from the original on 11 June 2017.
 Staff 22 December 2015. High Scores: The Best Videogames of 2015. Kill Screen. Archived from the original on 22 December 2015.
 Counting down the 20 best games of 2015: The top 5 of the year. Digital Spy. 27 December 2015. Archived from the original on 12 April 2016.
 Staff 31 December 2015. EGMs Best of 2015: Part Five: 05  01. Electronic Gaming Monthly. Archived from the original on 16 February 2016.
 Golden Joysticks 2015: The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt wins five gaming awards. BBC. 30 October 2015. Archived from the original on 30 October 2015.
 Sarkar, Samit 3 December 2015. Here are the winners of The Game Awards 2015. Polygon. Archived from the original on 4 December 2015.
 Crecente, Brian 19 February 2016. Fallout 4 named game of the year during DICE Awards. Polygon. Archived from the original on 19 February 2016.
 Makuch, Eddie 16 March 2016. Witcher 3 Wins GDC Game of the Year Award, Full Winners List. GameSpot. Archived from the original on 14 April 2016.
External links
Wikimedia Commons has media related to The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt.
Official website
Samsung Galaxy S5 Vector.svg2010s portal10 sided die.svgRoleplaying games portalDragon149393.svgSpeculative fiction portalWPVG icon 2016.svgVideo games portal
vte
CD Projekt
vte
The Witcher by Andrzej Sapkowski
vte
Golden Joystick Award for Ultimate Game of the Year
vte
Game Developers Choice Award for Game of the Year
vte
The Game Awards
Categories: 2015 video gamesAction roleplaying video gamesBandai Namco gamesDark fantasy video gamesFantasy video gamesOpen world video gamesPlayStation 4 gamesPlayStation 4 Pro enhanced gamesThe Witcher video gamesVideo game sequelsVideo games based on novelsVideo games based on Slavic mythologyVideo games developed in PolandVideo games featuring female protagonistsVideo games using PhysXVideo games with alternate endingsVideo games with downloadable contentVideo games with expansion packsVideo games with stereoscopic 3D graphicsWarner Bros. Interactive Entertainment gamesWindows gamesXbox One gamesXbox One X enhanced gamesCD Projekt games



